+++
title = "०३ शतं च"

+++

<details><summary>Whitney</summary>

### Translation
3. Whom even a hundred, hurling (*pra-hṛ*), smiting down, have not  
subdued (*stṛ*), to him Indra committed sight, breath, also strength:  
let the unsubdued one defend thee.

### Notes
In **a**, the *pada*-mss. wrongly divide *ca: ná*, and SPP. follows  
them. In **b**, about a third of SPP's authorities read *vighnántas;*  
Ppp. has *bhijanto*. The *yám* that follows it is our emendation,  
plainly suggested by the meter, the requirement of the sense, and the  
accent of the verb; but the comm. and Ppp. agree with the mss. in  
lacking it. At the end of **b** our *tastriré* is an emendation (now  
supported by Ppp., which has the same reading) for the *tastiré* of the  
mss. (one or two have *tasthiré*), the comm. ⌊but the ms. has  
*nirastire*⌋, and SPP.; the comm. explains it as = *tastarire*, with  
Vedic omission of part of the ending: this is of his usual degree of  
insight; what SPP. would do with his *tastiré* is hard to see; the  
emendation to *tastriré* is obvious and unquestionable. For *tásmin* in  
**c** Ppp. gives *yasmin*. The mss. in general read *páryadanta* (p.  
*pári: adanta*), but two or three of ours, with the comm's text (SPP.),  
*-ntaḥ cá-*; our emendation to *páry adatta*, now ratified by Ppp., is  
accepted by SPP. The comm's explanation implies *pari yad antaś ca-*;  
and he takes the *yat* as a form of root *i* (*pari yat paryagamayat  
paripūritavān*)! With the insertion of *yám* in **b**, the verse is a  
good *pan̄kti*, as defined by the Anukr.
</details>

<details><summary>Griffith</summary>

Indra hath lent the power of sight, and vital breath and strength to this. Whom even a hundred combatants, striking, have failed to over- come. Invincible, let it guard thee well.
</details>
