+++
title = "०६ घृतादुल्लुप्तो मधुमान्"

+++

<details><summary>Whitney</summary>

### Translation
6. Snatched out of ghee, rich in honey, rich in milk, thousand-breathed,  
hundred-wombed (? *-yóni*), vigor-imparting, both wealful and  
delightful, both rich in refreshment and rich in milk—let the unsubdued  
one defend thee.

### Notes
⌊We had **a** at 33. 2 **a**, above: cf. v. 28. 14.⌋ Ppp. reads at the  
beginning *ullabdhas*; one or two of SPP's mss. have *dúrluptas* ⌊cf.  
note to xviii. 2. 3⌋, *úrluptas*. In **b**, all the authorities (save  
one or two) give *sahásram prāṇás* or *sahásra prāṇáḥ* (p. *sahásram:  
prāṇáḥ*);\* but the comm. implies (perhaps only by his usual neglect of  
accent) *sahásraprāṇas*, and SPP. reports one of his mss. as giving the  
same; and he accordingly follows us in adopting it; Ppp. reads with the  
mss. ⌊*sahasraṁ prāṇáḥ*⌋. The comm. gives an extraordinary explanation  
of *-yoni* in **b**: *yoniśabdena śatrusaṁgamananimittaṁ  
śatruviyojanasādhanaṁ vā balaṁ vivakṣyate:* that is, without any regard  
to the established meanings of *yoni*, he takes it here as a mere  
representative of the radical sense of the root *yu* 'unite' or of the  
root *yu* 'separate'—he does not venture to decide which! The metrical  
description of the Anukr. is fairly correct (11 + 12: 7 + 8 + 8 = 46).  
\*⌊These corruptions of the true *sahásraprāṇas* are noteworthy as  
examples of faulty half-way assimilation of a reading to something  
similar in the immediate context: here the cause of the confusion is  
plainly the *sahásram prāṇā́ḥ* of vs. 5 **b**.⌋
</details>

<details><summary>Griffith</summary>

Drawn forth from butter, rich in milk and sweetness, hundred- lived, thousand-homed, bestowing vigour, Kindly, delightsome, full of sap, and mighty, invincible let it guard thee well.
</details>
