+++
title = "०१ ब्रह्म होता"

+++

<details><summary>Whitney</summary>

### Translation
1. The *bráhman* is invoker (*hótṛ*) the *bráhman* is the sacrifice; by  
the *bráhman* the sacrificial posts are set up; the officiating priest  
(*adhvaryú*) is born from the *bráhman;* within the *bráhman* is put the  
oblation.

### Notes
  
  
  
  
  
In **a** all the authorities ⌊and so SPP.⌋ read *yajñā́s*, which might  
better have been left unchanged. In **b** the authorities have mostly  
*sváravāmitā́* (also *svàravāmitā́*, and *sár-* or *sàravāmitā́*),  
*pada*-text *svàḥ: avāmitā́;* the comm., *svaragāmitā*, for which he  
gives a labored and worthless explanation; *sváravo mitā́ḥ* was our  
emendation, which is made certain by its occurrence in TB. ii. 4. 7¹⁰  
(in a verse otherwise corresponding with our vs. 2); and even SPP.  
follows it. In **d** the comm. has *brahmaṇi*, which suits better with  
*antar;* but the same sense is perhaps possible with *-ṇas*,\* which is  
the universal reading. Then the mss. give *antárhite* (p. *antáḥ॰hite*);  
our edition emends to *antár hitám;* SPP. agrees so far as to give  
*antárhitam;* the comm. has either the one or the other (the absence of  
accent makes it impossible to say which); if *bráhmaṇas* is not altered  
to *-ṇi, antárhitam* is as good as necessary; otherwise, each is about  
equally acceptable. \*⌊W. seems to have in mind such a construction as  
*tád antár asya sárvasya*, at Īśā Upanishad, vs. 5. If so, I do not see  
why he says that, if we read *bráhmaṇas*, we must also read  
*antárhitam*.⌋
</details>

<details><summary>Griffith</summary>

Brahma is Hotar, sacrifice: with Brahma are the stakes set up. From Brahma was the Adhvaryu born, from Brahma hidden offering.
</details>
