+++
title = "०२ ब्रह्म स्रुचो"

+++

<details><summary>Whitney</summary>

### Translation
2. The *bráhman* is the sacrificial spoons filled with ghee; by the  
*bráhman* is the sacrificial hearth set up (*ud-dhā*) and the *bráhman*  
is the essence (*tattvá*) of the sacrifice—the priests that are  
oblation-makers: ⌊to the slaughtered \[victim\] hail!⌋

### Notes
To the verse corresponds one in TB. ii. 4. 7¹⁰, which, however, has for  
**b** our 1 **b** (as noted above), and in **c** *yajñásya tántavaḥ*,  
and lacks the addition after **d**. In our text is left in **a**  
inadvertently *srucás*, which most of the mss. give; SPP. has the  
correct *srúcas* (so TB.). In **b**, our *pada*-mss. have *út॰hitā*, ⌊a  
word-division⌋ which is contrary to Prāt. iv. 63 and to the usage of the  
AV. hitherto; SPP. reads in his *pada*-text *úddhitā*, and makes no note  
upon the matter; ⌊he had in fact a note stating that his P.P.²J. also  
read *út॰hitā:* but, as appears from his "Corrections" to vol. iv., p.  
446, his note was disordered in printing;⌋ the comm. has instead  
*uddhṛtā*. In **c** all the authorities give *yajñásya táttvaṁ ca* ⌊but  
W's P. *tánvaṁ*⌋, and SPP. retains *táttvaṁ*, without even making the  
necessary emendation of accent to *tattvám;* the comm. also supports it,  
and it is implied in the translation given above; our alteration to  
*yajñáś ca sattráṁ ca* is probably more venturesome than is called for.  
⌊The place of the accent in the ms.-reading *táttvaṁ ca*, the Paris  
reading *tán-*, the un-Vedic look of *tattvam*, the *ṛ́caḥ prā́ñcas  
tántavas* of AV. xv. 3. 6, and the TB. parallel, all join in suggesting  
that the true reading is *yajñásya tántavas*.⌋ In the appendix to the  
verse, the comm. reads *sammitāya*.
</details>

<details><summary>Griffith</summary>

Brahma is fatness-dropping scoops: with Brahma was the altar reared. Brahma is worship, lengthened rite, the Rishis who pay sacrifice, the victim's Immolators. Hail!
</details>
