+++
title = "०४ मैनमग्ने वि"

+++

<details><summary>Whitney</summary>

### Translation
4. Do not, O Agni, burn him up; do not be hot upon (*abhi-śuc*) him; do  
not warp (*kṣip*) his skin, nor his body; when thou shalt make him done,  
O Jātavedas, then send him forward unto the Fathers.

### Notes
This verse and the next are RV. x. 16. 1 and 2, but RV. makes our 4  
**c** and 5 **a** change places (cf. note to our vs. 2). RV., however,  
reads *śocas* for *śūśucas* in **a**, and at the end *pitṛ́bhyas* ⌊as in  
our 5 **b**⌋ for *pitṝ́ṅr úpa*. In **d**, SPP. reads, with RV., *áthe ”m  
enam*, alleging for his reading three out of eight authorities, as  
against two or three that have *imám*. The comm. appears to read *īm*.  
Of our mss., all save O.Op.R. give *áthe ’mám enam* (and O. is corrected  
once to this, but the correction struck out again), as our edition  
reads; this is so bad a corruption that the authority for the other  
should be regarded as sufficient. TA. (in vi. 1. 4) agrees with RV.  
except in having *karávas* in its **c** ⌊our 5 **a**⌋. The text of the  
comm. agrees with RV. and TA. in having *pitṛbhyas* for *pitṝṅr upa*,  
while the comm. quotes *pitṛbhyas* and then adds and explains *upa*  
⌊constructively a blend-reading⌋. Our Bp. appears to give in **a**  
*śuśucaḥ*, as it ⌊apparently⌋ ought to do according to Prāt. iv. 86,  
though the example is not quoted in the comment on that rule; but the  
other *pada*-mss. ⌊and SPP.⌋ have *śūśucaḥ*. The Anukr. is questionable  
in its reading as to the verse, whether tristubh or jagatt: the RV.  
version is pure tristubh; the AV. one is mixed (12 + 11: 11 + 12). Kāuś.  
(81. 33) prescribes this verse to be used, with 2. 36; 3. 71, and ii.  
34. 5, when the youngest son lights the funeral pile, some of the schol.  
declaring vss. 4-7 to be intended instead ⌊cf. the comm., page 86²⁰⌋;  
then, in 81. 44, vss. 4-9 and 11-18 are called *anuṣṭhānīs*, and are to  
be repeated by the *anuṣṭhātṛ* during the cremation. ⌊Root *kṣip*  
properly means 'warp' in its obsolete sense 'cast or throw.' If, as I  
think, W. is right in rendering the causative here by 'warp' = 'twist  
out of shape, contort,' the cases present an interesting semantic  
parallel. BR. render by 'platzen machen.' Different is the sense of  
*ava-kṣip* at 4. 12: see my note.⌋
</details>

<details><summary>Griffith</summary>

Burn him not up, nor quite consume him, Agni. Let not his body or his skin be scattered. O Jatavedas, when thou hast matured him, then send him on his way unto the Fathers.
</details>
