+++
title = "११ अति द्रव"

+++

<details><summary>Whitney</summary>

### Translation
11. Run thou past the two four-eyed, brindled dogs of Saramā, by a happy  
(*sādhú*) road; then go unto the beneficent Fathers, who revel in common  
revelry with Yama.

### Notes
The corresponding verse in RV. is x. 14. 10. RV. puts *sārameyāú* before  
*śvā́nāu:* ⌊and with this order (but not with that of AV.), the  
resolution to *śuā́nāu* is effective in giving a normal rhythm⌋. RV.  
reads in **c** *áthā* for *ádhā*, and *úpa* for *ápi;* TA. (in vi. 3. 1)  
has *ápī ’hi*, but agrees otherwise with RV. The comm. gives instead  
*ape ’hi;* and it explains this difficult reading by either taking *apa*  
as used in the sense of *upa*, or else understanding it to mean "go away  
\[from the dogs\]"! The Anukr. pays no attention to the redundant  
syllable in **b**, ⌊unless it assumes a deficiency in **a** to balance  
it⌋. The verse (according to the comm., vss. 11-13) is used (Kāuś. 81.  
22) when the two kidneys of the accompanying sacrificed animal are (by  
way of a "sop to Cerberus") put into the hands of the dead man on the  
funeral pile. Then verses 11-18 are (Kāuś. 80. 35) mentioned and used  
with the *hariṇīs* (see under 1. 61); and by the schol. ⌊see note to  
Kāuś. 82. 31⌋ and the comm. they are reckoned themselves as *hariṇīs*.  
The comm. further prescribes them as accompanying the transfer of the  
dead body to the place of cremation.
</details>

<details><summary>Griffith</summary>

Run and outspeed the two dogs, Sarama's offspring, brindled, four-eyed, upon thy happy pathway. Draw nigh thou to the gracious-minded Fathers who take their pleasure in the feast with Yama.
</details>
