+++
title = "५३ अग्नीषोमा पथिकृता"

+++

<details><summary>Whitney</summary>

### Translation
53. O Agni-and-Soma, makers of roads, ye have distributed (*vi-dhā*) to  
the gods a pleasant treasure \[and\] world; send ye unto \[us\] Pūshan,  
who shall carry by goat-traveled roads him that goes thither.

### Notes
The translation implies emendation at the end of *gachatam* to  
*gáchantam*, which seems necessary in order to make sense; the  
corruption to the former may have been made because it better suits the  
meter.—⌊The translation also implies the reading *préṣyatam*, which is  
given in the Berlin text and is supported by⌋ our Op. (*prá: iṣyatam*),  
by SPP's ⌊CP. (*prá: īṣyatam*) and by his⌋ Dc. secunda manu: all the  
rest read *préṣyantam* (p. *prá: iṣ-* or *prá: īṣ-*), which SPP.  
accordingly adopts in his *saṁhitā*-text; ⌊but in his *pada*-text he  
prints *prá: ī́ṣyantam*, and he mentions the accent in his note⌋. The  
comm. glosses *preṣyantam* with *pragacchantam* in his usual loose and  
easy way.—Nearly all our mss. also have *ajoyā́nāis* (p. *ajaḥ॰y-*) in  
**d**; we followed Bs. in giving *ajay-* (which the translation  
implies). ⌊Weber also accepts the reading *ajay-* and interprets it as  
'traveled by man's unborn (*a-ja*) or immortal part, i.e. his spirit':  
*Festgruss an Roth*, p. 138 and note 5.⌋ On the authority of a single  
ms., SPP. accepts as his reading *añjoyā́nāis;* ⌊as to this matter, see  
my note marked with a \* in the next paragraph⌋. The reading  
*añjoyā́nāis* had already been conjectured by the Pet. Lexx.; ⌊so BR. v.  
959, with the meaning 'leading straight to the goal': cf. OB. i. 18 b⌋.  
The reading *añjay-* is given by two or three of SPP's mss.; among them  
is that of the comm., who explains by *añjasā, ārjavena yānti...ebhiḥ*.  
The "goat-traveled" roads, of course, are those to which Pūṣan's team of  
goats are wonted.—Two of SPP's authorities give *dadhatus* in **b**; the  
comm. reads *dadhatus* in one of two alternative explanations, and  
*-thus* in the other.—Possibly *ví* before *lokám* is to be taken as  
belonging to this word alone: 'ye have assigned to the gods a pleasant  
treasure.' ⌊I do not see what W. means by the last sentence.⌋—For the  
use of the verse by Kāuś. etc., see under 1. 61 and 2. 48; the comm.  
includes with it vss. 54 and 55. It exceeds a proper *triṣṭubh* by two  
syllables.  
  
\* ⌊In reading *añjoyā́nāis*, SPP. is supported in fact by three or four  
of his mss. (B.C.R.Dc.p.m.) and presumably also by at least three of his  
*pada*-mss., since he reports nothing to the contrary. Moreover, he  
thinks that further support is given him by the reading *añjāy-* of two  
of his authorities (Dc. sec. manu, and the reciter V.), which reading,  
as he says, may represent an ill-corrected reading *añjoy-*; and perhaps  
the *ajāuy-* of the reciter K. points in the same direction, to  
*añjoy-*. As between the readings *añjoy-* and *ajay-*, even Whitney's  
mss. point decidedly to *añjoy-*.—Leaving the mss. of this passage out  
of account, however, the word *añjoyā́na* is well supported by its exact  
synonym *añjasā́yana*, p. *añjasā॰áyana*, used four times of the paths  
(*srutí*) by which one goes to the heavenly world (TS. vii. 2. 1²; 3.  
5³; 4. 1³: also AB. iv. 17, here as the exact opposite of a 'roundabout  
road' *mah¯ápathaḥ paryāṇaḥ*), and also by the doubtless precisely  
equivalent *añjasī́nām* (*srutím*) of the Rigveda (x. 32. 7).—This last  
phrase Sāyaṇa explains alternatively by *ṛjum akuṭilam mārgam;* cf. his  
similar explanation of *pathó devatrā́ ’ñjase ’va yā́nān* at x. 73. 7; cf.  
also *añjasāyano*, used in the Dīgha Nikāya, xiii. 4 ff., as a synonym  
of *uju-maggo:* all of which is in most perfect accord with the  
above-mentioned *ārjavena* etc. of our comm., whose testimony therefore  
is decidedly in favor of the reading *añjoyā́nāis*.—If *añjoy-* is the  
true reading and *ajay-* the corrupt one, the corruption is a very  
natural one, considering that Pūṣan's team (see RV. vi. 55. 6, 4; 57. 3;  
x. 26. 8; and the occurrences of *ajā́śva*) consists of goats.⌋
</details>

<details><summary>Griffith</summary>

Ye have prepared, pathmakers, Agni-Soma, a fair world for the Gods to be the it treasure. Go to that world and send us Pushan hither to bear us on the paths the goat hath trodden.
</details>
