+++
title = "५८ अग्नेर्वर्म परि"

+++

<details><summary>Whitney</summary>

### Translation
58. Wrap about thee of kine a protection from the fire; cover thyself up  
with grease and fatness, lest the bold one, exulting with violence  
(*háras*), shake thee strongly (*dadṛ́ḥ*) about, intending to consume  
thee.

### Notes
  
  
  
  
  
The corresponding RV. verse is x. 16. 7; in **b** it transposes *médasā*  
and *pī́vasā*, and in **d** it has *vidhakṣyán paryan̄kháyāte*, which is  
decidedly better. TA. (in vi. 1. 4) reads *dádhad vidhakṣyán  
paryan̄kháyātāi*. Our *vidhakṣán*, though read by both editions, is only  
another example of the not infrequent careless omission of *y* after a  
*ṣ* or *ś;* only one of our mss. (Op.) reads *-kṣyán*, but five of SPP's  
authorities give *-kṣyan* (as against six with *-kṣan*), and it is much  
to be wondered at that he has not adopted it in his text; the comm.  
seems to read *-kṣan*, but explains as if *-kṣyan* (*viśeṣeṇa dagdhum  
icchan*). At the end we ought to read *parin̄kháyātāi*, and SPP. gives  
that, with the majority of his mss., the rest having, with our text,  
*párīn̄khay-;* of our mss., only two of the later collated ones (O.Op.)  
have the proper accent; Bp. has *pári॰īn̄khayātāi*, which is absurd\*;  
the comm. treats *pari* as an independent word (as if the reading were  
*párī ”n̄kháyātāi*). The comm. glosses *dadhṛ́k* by *pragalbhas;* ⌊cf. my  
*Noun-Inflection*, JAOS. x. 498⌋. By Kāuś. (81. 25) the verse is taught  
to be used when the dead man's face is covered with the omentum of the  
*anustaraṇī* cow (hence 'of kine') on the pile; the omentum is to be  
pierced with seven holes. \*⌊Cf. the impossible *pada*-reading  
*ví॰bhāti* at xiii. 3. 17, and the other similar ones cited in the note  
to that verse.⌋
</details>

<details><summary>Griffith</summary>

Mail thee with flesh against the flames of Agni; encompass thee about with fat and marrow; So will the bold One eager to attack thee with fierce glow fail to girdle and consume thee.
</details>
