+++
title = "०२ त्रीणि ते"

+++

<details><summary>Whitney</summary>

### Translation
2. Three names are thine, O *kúṣṭha:* by-no-means-killing,  
by-no-means-harming:—by no means may this man take harm, for whom I  
bespeak (*pari-brū*) thee, at evening and in the morning, likewise by  
day.

### Notes
In **a**, part of the mss. accent *kúṣṭha*. In **b, c**, SPP. reads  
*nadyamāró nadyā́riṣaḥ: nádyā ’yám* etc. There is hardly any ms. that  
distinguishes *dya* and *gha* in such a manner that confidence can be  
placed in its testimony as between the two; so that, although SPP.  
reports *nadya-* from all his mss., it is really of no account. But the  
comm. shows that he reads *nadya-* by his explanation: *nadya*, he says,  
means "being in a stream (*nadī*)," and by "stream" is meant the waters  
(*udakāni*) in a stream; and the virtual sense is "diseases that  
originate in faults of water": or else, he sagely adds (betraying that  
his expositions are, as usual, the merest guesses of a skilless  
etymologist), *nadya* means *nadanīya* or *śabdanīya:* i.e.,  
*atyantaduṣpariharatvena śabdyamāna;* and the two epithets mean  
"killing" or "harming" such *nadyas;* while the third name is *nadya*  
simply, since a killer (*māraka*) of *nadyas* is himself called *nadya*.  
We had the second of the two epithets above, at viii. 2. 6 and 7. 6, and  
in the former passage the comm. explained (falsely) and read *nagha-*.  
It seems hardly doubtful that our readings. ⌊with *gh*, not *dy*⌋ and  
the translation founded on them are the true ones here, though that  
implies that the comm. worked from mss. only, and not from oral  
representatives of the text ⌊Weber, *Sb.* 1896, p. 681, discusses *na  
gha*.⌋ Ppp. agrees precisely with our text in **b** and **c** (in **d**  
it has *asmāi* and in **e** *divaḥ*). In **b**, all the mss. read  
(assuming, here and later, that the character is *dya*, and not *gha*)  
*nadyá mā́ro* (p. *nadyá: mā́raḥ*); nearly all follow it with *nadyā́yuṣo*  
or *-ṣaḥ* (p. *nadyá: ā́yuṣaḥ*); but two of SPP's, and two others p.m.,  
give *nadyā́riṣo* ⌊the comm. *nadyariṣo*⌋. In **c** the general reading  
is *nadyā́yámpúruṣoriṣat*, but one or two fail to accent *’yam*, and a  
few have *-ṣo rṣat* (all the *pada*-mss. *ṛṣat*). The comm. treats  
*nadya* in **c** as a vocative, and SPP. accordingly changes the accent  
to *nádyā ’yám;* in **b** he alters the *pada*-text to *nadya॰māráḥ:  
nadyá॰riṣaḥ*. The Anukr. pronounces this verse, as well as the two  
following, *tryavasāna*, but nearly all the mss. omit here the sign of  
interpunction before *na ghā ’yam puruṣo riṣat*, although they introduce  
it both times later; in this verse, our edition follows the mss., but  
SPP's the Anukr. In **d**, all the mss. give *pári bra-*; SPP. follows  
us in emending the accent to *paribrávīmi*. The comm. repeats *nadyā  
’yam puruṣo riṣat* a second time.
</details>

<details><summary>Griffith</summary>

Kushtha, three several names hast thou, Naghamara, Nagharisha: let not mishap befall this man, For whom I make a charm of thee at eve, at morning, and by day.
</details>
