+++
title = "०१ ओ चित्"

+++

<details><summary>Whitney</summary>

### Translation
1. Unto a friend would I turn with friendship; having gone through much  
ocean, may the pious one take a grandson of \[his\] father, considering  
further onward upon the earth (*kṣám*).

### Notes
That is, 'making thoughtful provision for the future.' The verse is,  
without variant, RV. x. 10. 1. Our Bs.E. have *purú* in *saṁhitā*. The  
verse is also SV. i. 340, which has a considerably different text: for  
**a**, *ā́ tvā sákhāyaḥ sakhyā́ vavṛtyus;* in **b**, *arṇavā́ṅ jagamyāḥ;*  
for **d**, *asmín kṣáye pratarā́ṁ dī́dyānaḥ*. The comm. takes *vavṛtyām*  
as of causative value, = *vartayāmi*: *dīdhyānas* he explains first (as  
if it were *dīdyānas*) by *dīpyamānas*, 'becoming illustrious over the  
whole earth'; but also, alternatively, by "thinking \[upon a means of  
impregnating me\]."—The word *sakhyā́* he takes as instr. of *sakhyā́*  
'friendship' ⌊so Lanman, *Noun-Inflection*, JAOS. x. 336⌋, and renders  
by *sakhitvena;* but also alternatively as instr. of *sakhī*, 'by means  
of a female friend,' a go-between!  
  
⌊An oxytone feminine stem *sakhī́* corresponding (cf. JAOS. x. 368) to a  
barytone masculine *sákhi* should accent its instr. *sakhyā̀* (JAOS. x.  
368, top, 381), not *sakhyā́*.⌋ ⌊Aufrecht, *Festgruss an Böhtlingk*,  
1888, page 1, took *sakhyā́* as a dative of *sakhyá;* and Pischel, *Ved.  
Stud.* i. 65 (title-page dated 1889), made a cogent and interesting  
argument against my view and came (independently, without doubt) to the  
same conclusion as Aufrecht.—For Geldner's interpretation of the whole  
verse, see *Gurupūjākaumudī*, p. 19-20.⌋
</details>

<details><summary>Griffith</summary>

Fain would I win my friend to kindly friendship. So may the Sage, come through the air's wide ocean, Remembering the earth and days to follow, obtain a son the issue of his father.
</details>
