+++
title = "३९ स्तेगो न"

+++

<details><summary>Whitney</summary>

### Translation
39. Thou goest over the earth as a *stegá* over the ground; let winds  
blow here on the great earth (*bhū́mi*) for us; Mitra for us there  
(*átra*), Varuṇa, being joined, hath let loose heat (*śóka*), as fire  
does in the forest.

### Notes
RV. x. 31. 9 corresponds, but has very considerable differences of  
reading: in **a**, *eti pṛthvī́m;* for **b**, *míhaṁ ná vā́to ví ha vāti  
bhū́ma;* in **c**, *yátra* (for *no átra*) and *ajyámānas* (for *yuj-*);  
in **d**, *‘gnír v-*. Part of the AV. mss. also have *‘gnír v-* (our  
O.R., and nearly half of SPP's), which accordingly might well be adopted  
in the text; but SPP., like our edition, reads *agnír v-*. One or two of  
our mss. (Op.R.s.m.) read in **d** *asṛṣṭa* (*vyàs-*), and so do a  
minority of SPP's; and the latter gives in his *saṁhitā*-text  
*vyásṛṣṭa*, but (apparently by an oversight) in his *pada*-text *ví:  
asṛṣṭa;* one sees no reason at all for the accentuation of the verb ⌊the  
AV. text, with its *átra*⌋.\* Our text is plainly an unintelligent  
corruption of an unintelligible verse. The RV. comm. guesses  
*raśmisaṁghāty ādityaḥ* to be the meaning of the ⌊very rare⌋ *stegá*,  
but only on the ground of a worthless etymology. Our comm. is defective  
here, but the lacuna is filled up by the editor, who makes it signify "a  
frog "! ⌊a meaning possibly suggested by the passage at TS. v. 7. 11  
(which is parallel to VS. xxv. 1)⌋. Ludwig conjectures "a plowshare"  
⌊and Weber follows him⌋. Our *pada*-text reads in **b** *mahī́ íti*, and  
the case is quoted under Prāt. i. 74 as that of a locative in *ī;* our  
comm. renders it ⌊alternatively⌋ by *mahatīm;* he also renders  
*vyásṛṣṭa* by *nāśayatu!* The ṁ of *pṛthivī́ṁ* is ⌊almost or quite  
illegible⌋ in our text. The Anukr. takes no notice of the metrical  
irregularities of the verse (10 + 11: 12 + 11 = 44).  
  
\*⌊The RV. reads *vy ásṛṣṭa*, and has the difficult *pada*-reading *ví:  
ásṛṣṭa:* here the RV's accentuation of *ásṛṣṭa* is accounted for by the  
RV's *yátra;* and the accent of ví is to be put with the remarkable  
cases (some thirty) mentioned by W., *Gram.* § 1084 a, whether we regard  
it as a blunder helped by the wavering tradition as to *átra, yátra*, or  
not. (Cf. what is said about "blend-readings" under xiv. 2. 18 and, just  
below, under xviii. 1. 42.) Whitney's Bp. follows the RV. in giving *ví:  
ásṛṣṭa* and his Bs. has *vyásṛṣṭa;* cf. the *ví: ádadhus* of xix. 6. 5  
**a**.⌋
</details>

<details><summary>Griffith</summary>

O'er the broad land thou goest like a Stega: here on vast earth let breezes blow upon us, Here hath our dear Friend Varuna, united, like Agni in the wood, shot forth his splendour.
</details>
