+++
title = "४० स्तुहि श्रुतं"

+++

<details><summary>Whitney</summary>

### Translation
40. Praise thou the famed sitter on the hollow of men (*jána*), the  
terrible king, formidable assailant (? *upahatnú*); being praised, O  
Rudra, be gracious to the singer; let thine army (? *sénya*) lay low  
(*ni-vap*) another than us.

### Notes
The verse corresponds to RV. ii. 33. 11 (also found in TS. iv. 5. 10³,  
without variant from RV.), which reads in **a-b** *-sádaṁ yúvānam mṛgáṁ  
ná bh-*, and, for **d**, *‘nyáṁ te asmán ní vapantu sénāḥ*. The  
substitution in our text of *sényam* for *sénās* at the end throws into  
confusion sense and construction. The comm. first takes it as = *senās*,  
and then as accus. qualifying *anyám* and signifying *tava senārham*, in  
the latter case supplying *senās* as subject of the verb. *Gartasádam*  
he takes first in the Nirukta sense of *śmaśānasaṁcaya*, and then in its  
"ordinary" (*prasiddha*) meaning, adding *tasyā ’raṇye saṁcārād  
gartasadanaṁ yujyate*. The Kāuś. (85. 19) uses the verse in connection  
with the digging of a hollow (*garta*) in the middle of the measured  
space at the *piṇḍapitṛyajña*, and the scattering into it of a number of  
heterogeneous substances. Our comm., by some rare and strange  
oversight, makes no mention of this *viniyoga*, and so does not take it  
into account in the explanation of the verse. Apparently it is only the  
occurrence of *gartasad* in the verse that suggests the use; of real  
applicability to the situation there is none.
</details>

<details><summary>Griffith</summary>

Sing praise to him the chariot-borne, the famous, Sovran of men, the dread and strong destroyer. O Rudra, praised be gracious to the singer; let thy darts spare us and smite down another.
</details>
