+++
title = "४९ परेयिवांसं प्रवतो"

+++

<details><summary>Whitney</summary>

### Translation
49. Him that went away to the advances called great, spying out the road  
for many, Vivasvant's son, gatherer of people, king Yama, honor  
(*sapary*) ye with oblation.

### Notes
The verse is RV. x. 14. 1, which, however, reads *ánu* for *íti* at end  
of **a**, and *duvasya* for *saparyata* in **d**. A verse in MS. iv. 14.  
16 has the RV. version throughout. TA. (in vi. 1. 1) gives at the end  
the genuine variant *duvasyata*, but also in **a** and **b** the  
incredible blunders *pare yuvā́ṅsam* and *anapaspaśānám;* ⌊so even the  
Poona ed., p. 405⌋. With the first half-verse is to be compared our vi.  
28. 3 **a, b**. The *íti* of our version, at end of **a**, seems a  
worthless corruption (SPP. thinks it certainly "a mistake for *áti*";  
but that is not very plausible, though our I., doubtless by an  
accidental slip, has *áti*, and P.M. have *ata*); the comm. reads *anu*,  
with the other texts. ⌊With this vs. and the next, cf. 3. 13 below: the  
second half of 3. 13 is identical with the second half of this vs.⌋ In  
Kāúś. (81. 34), recital of the verse accompanies offerings to Yama at  
the lighting of the funeral pile. Metrically, it is *svarāj* (12 + 11:  
11 + 12 = 46) rather than *bhurij*. ⌊Caland, *Todtengebräuche*, p. 65,  
observes that "Kāuś. 81. 34-36 \[meaning 34-37\] form one single whole."  
They indicate the eleven verses (translated by C, p. 64) that are to be  
used to accompany the eleven oblations to Yama (*yāmān homān*), offered  
in the *pitṛmedha*, after the lighting of the fire. The vss. are: xviii.  
1. 49, 50, for the first two oblations; xviii. 1. 58, 59, 60, 61 (the  
last vs. of the hymn) and xviii. 2. 1, 2, 3, for the next seven; and  
xviii. 3. 13 and 2. 49, for the last two: in all, eleven, *ity ekādaśa*.  
Whereupon follow the oblations to Sarasvatī.—It should be noted that the  
group 1. 58 to 2. 3 (Kāuś.: *iti saṁhitāḥ sapta*) disregards the  
existing division of the book into *anuvāka*-hymns.⌋
</details>

<details><summary>Griffith</summary>

Honour the King with your oblations, Yama, Vivasvan's son, who gathers men together. Even him who travelled o'er the mighty rivers, who searches out and shows the path to many.
</details>
