+++
title = "०१ उदगातां भगवती"

+++

<details><summary>Whitney</summary>

### Translation
1. Arisen are the (two) blessed stars called the Unfasteners (*vicṛ́t*);  
let them unfasten (*vi-muc*) of the *kṣetriyá* the lowest, the highest  
fetter.

### Notes
The disease *kṣetriyá* (lit'ly, 'of the field') is treated elsewhere,  
especially in iii. 7 (mentioned also in ii. 10; 14. 5; iv. 18. 7). The  
comm. defines it here as *kṣetre parakṣetre putrapāutrādiśarīre  
cikitsyaḥ* (quoting for this interpretation Pāṇ. v. 2. 92)  
*kṣayakuṣṭhādidoṣadūṣitapitṛmātrādiśarīrāvayavebhya āgataḥ  
kṣayakuṣṭhāpasmārādirogaḥ*—apparently an infectious disorder, of various  
forms, appearing in a whole family, or perhaps endemic. The name  
*vicṛtāu* 'the two unfasteners' is given later to the two stars in the  
sting of the Scorpion (λ and ν Scorpionis: see *Sūryā-Siddhānta*, note  
to viii. 9), and there seems no good reason to doubt that they are the  
ones here intended; the selection of two so inconspicuous is not any  
more strange than the appeal to stars at all; the comm. identifies them  
with Mūla, which is the asterism composed of the Scorpion's tail. The  
verse is nearly identical with iii. 7. 4, and its first half is vi.  
121. 3 **a, b**. Ppp. has for **c, d** *sukṣetriyasya muñcatāṁ  
saṃgranthya hṛdayasya ca.* ⌊"Their \[the two stars'\] healing virtue  
would doubtless be connected with the meteorological conditions of the  
time at which their heliacal rising takes place."—*Sūryā-siddhānta*.  
l.c., p. 337.⌋
</details>

<details><summary>Griffith</summary>

Twin Stars of happy omen, named Releasers, have gone up. May they Loose, of inherited disease, the uppermost and lowest bond.
</details>
