+++
title = "०३ देवानां पत्नीनां"

+++

<details><summary>Whitney</summary>

### Translation
3. Embryo of the wives of the gods, instrument of Yama, excellent dream;  
the evil \[dream\] that is mine, that do we send forth to him that hates  
us.

### Notes
The mss. all read *devā́nām pátnīnāṁ gárbha* (one *pada*-mss. *-bham*)  
*yamásya kárayo bhadrásvapnaḥ;* the translation implies no further  
emendation than to *gárbho* and *káraṇo;* ⌊the minor Pet. Lex., iv. 249,  
accepts *bhadrásvapna* as a descriptive compound, although the accent  
(*Gram.* §1280 c) is very exceptional;⌋ SPP., following the comm.,  
changes to *dévānām patnīnāṁ garbha yámasya kara yó bhadráḥ svapna*. Our  
*devápatnīnām* and *káraṇas* were suggested especially by the  
*devajāmīnā́m* and *káraṇas* of vi. 46. 2 and xvi. 5. 6, of which neither  
the comm. nor SPP. take any notice. In the second division of the verse  
the two editions agree, save that ours emends *tát* of the mss. (which  
SPP. follows) to *tám;* and the latter is supported by our P.M., and by  
the comm. But the mss. have at the beginning *samámayaḥ*, and the  
*pada*-mss. resolve it into *samám: ayaḥ*. The Anukr. and comm. and SPP.  
add to this verse what in our text is the first division of vs. 4; our  
division is that of our first mss., and is preferable on the ground of  
the sense. ⌊The prose verse, according to the division of the Anukr.,  
may be made to count (8 + 10: 13: 13?) as 44 syllables.⌋
</details>

<details><summary>Griffith</summary>

Child of Gods' Consorts, minister of Yama is the good Dream: that which is my trouble we drive away to the enemy.
</details>
