+++
title = "०४ तं त्वा"

+++

<details><summary>Whitney</summary>

### Translation
4. Thee that art "harsh" by name, mouth of the black bird  
(*-śakúni*)—thee, O sleep, we thus know completely; do thou, O sleep, as  
a horse a halter, as a horse a girth, scatter him who is not of us, the  
god-reviler, the mocker.

### Notes
⌊Prose.⌋ The translation here is of no authority, including various  
venturesome emendations of the text; it follows our text except at the  
end, where, instead of *badhāna*, it implies the (unsatisfactory) *vapa*  
of the comm. and SPP.; all the mss. read *vápus* ⌊or *vápu*⌋. At the  
beginning, the *pada*-mss. give *mā́tṛṣṭā: nāma: asi: kṛṣṇa॰śakune:  
múkham;* and the *saṁhitā*-mss. agree with them, with worthless  
variations of accent ⌊and some slight differences besides⌋, and with  
*-kuner* in one or two. SPP. reads, however, *mā́ tṛṣṭā́nām asi  
kṛṣṇaśakunér múkham*, won, as he claims, by adding accents to the comm's  
text; but this differs from the mss. only by ⌊the word-division and⌋ by  
*-nāmasi* and *-ner;* how the comm. divides and understands  
*mātṛṣṭānāmasi* is unknown, as his explanation of the words is wanting  
(though SPP. notes no lacuna). So much (to *múkham*) is, as was noted  
above, added to vs. 3 by Anukr., comm., and SPP. In the next division of  
the verse, for *kakṣyā̀m*, the mss., the comm., and SPP., give *kāyám*,  
which might mean 'body'; the comm. is apparently imperfect here, reading  
*aśvo yathā svakīyaṁ rajodhūsaraṁ \[kāyaṁ\] dhunoti yathā cā ’śvo  
nīnāham palyāṇakavacādikam avakirati:* with *kāyam* is perhaps omitted  
also *śarīram*, its gloss. Our mss. end vs. 4 with *nīnāhám*, and it was  
our emendation to add the next clause; but this the comm. does also,  
ending with *vapa*, while SPP. goes on to *gṛhe* without making a  
verse-division; the sense (so far as we can be said to understand it)  
favors our division and the comm's. The latter reads *avā ’smākam*,  
finding thus an *ava...vapa*, which he explains by *tiraskuru*. All the  
mss. give *pípāruṁ* ⌊P.M.: *píy-*⌋ *vápur* ⌊or *vápu*⌋ yád etc., with  
not even a pāda-division after *vápus;* such a division was due in our  
text, however, after *nīnāhám*. ⌊The Anukr. seems to intend to count the  
verse (*taṁ tvā* to *gṛhe*) as 9 + 9 + 7 + 13 (reading *vapa*): 8 + 8 =  
54.⌋
</details>

<details><summary>Griffith</summary>

Thou whose name is Rough art the mouth of the Black Bird. As such we know thee, Dream, as such we know thee well. Like a horse art thou, O Dream. As they bind girth and surcingle on a horse, so bind the alien mischief-maker, the scorner of the Gods.
</details>
