+++
title = "०४ एतास्ते अग्ने"

+++

<details><summary>Whitney</summary>

### Translation
4. These pieces of fuel are for thee, O Agni; with them, O burning one,  
become thou united; put in us \[long\] life-time; put immortality in the  
Āryan.

### Notes
The second and fourth pādas are wholly corrupt; the translation follows  
in part our emended text. ⌊For **b**, the translation implies *tā́bhir  
dhakṣo* (cf. RV. x. 115. 4; ii. 4. 4, where the *saṁhitā* has *dákṣoḥ;*  
RV. Prāt. iv. 41 end) *sám íd bhava;*⌋ and for **d**, it implies  
*amṛtatváṁ cā́ ”rye*. For **b**, the general reading of the authorities  
is *tvā́m íd dhaṅsó* (p. *haṅsáḥ*) *samíd* (p. *sam॰ít*) *bhava;* one or  
two have *dhaso* or *vāṅso*, one *tvā́v íd dhaṅsó*, three *bhavaḥ*. SPP.  
conjectures that the original reading may have been *tā́bhir vaso samíd  
bhava;* he adopts as his text, from the comm., *tvám iddháḥ samíd  
bhava*. In **c**, the *ā́* before *dhehi* is not found in the mss.; a  
less correction, with better meter, would have been *dhehy ā́*. For  
**d**, the mss., the comm., and SPP., give *amṛtatvám ācāryā̀ya* (p.  
*amṛta॰tvám:* *ā॰cāryā̀ya*).  
  
⌊The Daś. Kar., as reported by Bloomfield on Kāuś. 57. 26, also gives  
*ācāryāya;* moreover, the passage in PCS. (ii. 4. 3), which treats of  
the ceremony of initiation to which (see introd., above) these verses  
belong, contains in fact a prayer of the student on behalf of his  
teacher or initiator: *jīvaputro mamā ”cāryo medhāvy aham asāni* etc.;  
and the AV. comm. explains *ācāryāya* accordingly by *upanayanakartre  
gāyatrīpradātre* etc. This all makes against W's *cā́ ”rye* and in favor  
of the ms.-reading *ācāryā̀ya:* this dative, no less than the locative  
*asmā́su*, goes easily with *dhehy ā́*⌋.
</details>

<details><summary>Griffith</summary>

Agni, these logs are thine: with these be, fain to burn! a flaming brand. Vouchsafe us length of life and give us hope of immortality.
</details>
