+++
title = "१४ सङ्कसुको विकसुको"

+++

<details><summary>Whitney</summary>

### Translation
14. The crushing ⌊*sáṁkasuka*⌋, the bursting (*víkasuka*), the  
destroying (*nirṛthá*) and the noiseless (? *nisvará*)—they, of like  
possessions (? *sávedas*), have made from far thy *yákṣma* to disappear  
afar.

### Notes
The translation implies emendation at the end to *anīnaśan*, which seems  
altogether necessary. Yet MS. (iv. 14. 17) and TA. (ii. 4⁵) strangely  
have instead of it *acīcatam* (not *-tan*). ⌊But see *Kaṭha*-hss., p.  
72, where the Berlin ms. is reported as reading *cīcatan*. The TA. comm.  
renders *acīcatam* by *cātayantu*.⌋ In **b**, TA. reads *nisvanáḥ*, and  
MS. *nírṛto* and *nísvanaḥ;* in **c**, MS. has *‘smad* (not *‘smád!*)  
for *te*, and TA. *té ye ‘smád* (but the *ye* perhaps a blunder of the  
edition\*); both *ánāgasas* instead of *sávedasas* (which looks like a  
mere blunder, intended to have the sense of *saṁvidānā́s*). Then TA. has  
*sáṁhus-*, *víkus-*, in **a**, and with it agrees Āp. (ix. 3. 22, **a**  
and **b** only, with *vikiro yaś ca viṣkiraḥ* for **b**). Moreover, both  
MS. and TA. accent *yakṣmám*.\* Some of our mss. (Bp.I.K.) read  
*nirrathás* in **b**, but this is only an example of the frequent  
confusion of *ṛ* and *ra*. Ppp. has ⌊*vikasukas* in **a**, like our  
text⌋, *savedhasas* in **c**, and *ucidyavo* (for *anīnaśam*) at the  
end. \*⌊The Poona ed., p. 126, gives *té ‘smád*, but notes one ms. as  
having *te ye ‘smad;* and it accents *yákṣmam*.⌋
</details>

<details><summary>Griffith</summary>

The Breaker-up, the Burster, the Destroyer, and the Silent One, These have expelled Consumption far, far off from thee and all thou hast,
</details>
