+++
title = "०१ शकधूमं नक्षत्राणि"

+++

<details><summary>Whitney</summary>

### Translation
1. When the asterisms made the *śakadhū́ma* their king, they bestowed on  
him auspicious (*bhadrá-*) day, saying "This shall be \[his\] royalty."

### Notes
*śakadhū́ma* (with irregular but not unparalleled accent: see my *Skt.  
Gr.* §1267 b) means primarily 'dung-smoke,' i.e. smoke arising from  
burning dung (or else the vapor from fresh dung). According to the  
comm., it signifies here the fire from which such smoke arises, and  
then, "on account of inseparability from that, a Brahman"; and he quotes  
TS. v. 2. 8¹⁻²: "a Brahman is indeed this Agni Vāiśvānara." The  
Kāuśika-Sūtra, in a passage (50. 15, 16) also quoted by the comm., says  
that, with this hymn, 'having laid balls of dung on the joints of a  
Brahman friend, one asks dung-smoke, "what sort of day today?" He (of  
course, the Brahman\*) answers "propitious, very favorable."' Prof.  
Bloomfield takes *śakadhūma* to be out-and-out the title of a Brahman,  
"weather-prophet"; but this seems not to follow from the Sūtra, also not  
from the Anukr., and least of all from the hymn. The Pāipp. version  
differs considerably from ours (but nearly agrees with one in an  
appendix to the Nakṣatra-kalpa: see Bloomfield, AJP. vii. 485): it reads  
*yad rājānaṁ śakadhūmaṁ nakṣatrāṇy akṛṇuta: bhadrāham asmāi prā ’yachan  
iato rāṣṭram ajāyata*. The accent of *ásāt* in **d** is not explained by  
any known rule. \*⌊So Keśava to Kāuś. 50. 16.⌋
</details>

<details><summary>Griffith</summary>

What time the heavenly bodies chose the Weather Prophet as their King, They brought him favouring weather, and, Let this be his do- main, they said.
</details>
