+++
title = "०४ ऋतुभ्यष्ट्वार्तवेभ्यो माद्भ्यः"

+++

<details><summary>Whitney</summary>

### Translation
4. Thee with the seasons, with them of the seasons; thee unto lifetime,  
unto splendor; with the brilliancy of the year—with that we make  
\[thee\] cheek by jowl.

### Notes
⌊All the mss. give here *ṛtúbhiṣ ṭvé ’ty ékā* (= v. 28. 13), except W's  
O. and SPP's careful Dc., which have, disregarding the accents,  
*ṛtubhyaṣ ṭve ’ty ekā* (= iii. 10. 10). The metrical definition of the  
Anukr. as *purauṣṇih*, coinciding with its definition of v. 28. 13 (not  
with that of iii. 10. 10), supports the mss. in the implication that a  
repetition of v. 28. 13 is here intended; and so does the *pratīka*  
given by the Anukr., which is *ṛtubhaṣ ṭvā ”rtavāiḥ* (not the  
*”rtavebhyaḥ* of iii. 10. 10). The Berlin ed., accordingly, here repeats  
v. 28. 13: SPP., on the other hand, repeats iii. 10. 10;⌋ in this he  
follows the comm., who gives at this point, curiously, iii. 10. 10 in  
full, and makes an entirely new commentary upon it, taking no notice of  
its having occurred before. The mss. appear to have confounded the two  
*pratīkas* in a measure: ⌊and this probably accounts for the false  
lingualization of *-bhyaṣ ṭvā*—see note to iii. 10. 10, and observe that  
both mss. of the Anukr. here have *ṛtubhaṣ ṭv-*, which is neither one  
thing nor the other!⌋ ⌊For *sáṁhanu*, W's 'cheek by jowl' is perhaps a  
better version than the one which he gave at v. 28. 13, 'of closed jaw,  
free from involuntary opening of the jaws.' A third version is given by  
Griffith: 'we fasten thee \[the amulet\] about the neck.' Dīgha Nikāya,  
ii. 6l, suggests still a fourth interpretation, 'affected with  
lock-jaw,' not applicable here: cf. viii. 1. 16.⌋
</details>

<details><summary>Griffith</summary>

With Seasons and with Season-groups, for vigour and extended life. With splendour of the perfect year we fasten thee about the neck.
</details>
