+++
title = "०३ नदीं यन्त्वप्सरसोऽपां"

+++

<details><summary>Whitney</summary>

### Translation
3. Let the Apsarases go to the stream, to the loud (?) down-blowing of  
the waters: Guggulū, Pīlā, Naladī, Āukṣagandhi, Pramandanī: so go away,  
ye Apsarases; ye have been recognized.

### Notes
⌊See Weber's note and reference to Rumpelstilzchen.⌋ *Tārá* in **b** is  
rendered "crossing"; but as this sense is found nowhere else, it seems  
safer to take the word as the adjective, common later; the comm. glosses  
it with *tārayitāram*, a worthless etymological guess. After it, instead  
of *avaśvasam*, the comm. reads *iva svasam* (= *suṣṭhu  
nāupreraṇakuśalaṁ yathā*), and, strangely enough, Ppp. has the same. As  
everywhere else where the word occurs, the mss. vary between *gulgulu*  
and *guggulu*, and SPP. reads the former and our edition the latter;  
here the decided majority, with Ppp. and the comm., give *gulg-* (our  
Bp.H.K. have *gugg-*). Pādas **c** and **d** appear to be made up of  
names of Apsarases, all formed upon odor-names: *guggulū́* is fem. to  
*gúggulu* 'bdellium,' and *naladī́* to *nálada* 'nard'; *pramandanī́* is  
related with *pramanda* 'a certain fragrant plant'; and *āukṣágandhi*  
means something like 'ox-smell'; but the comm. declares them to be  
*pañca homadravyāṇi* 'five articles of oblation'; Ppp. reads  
*prabandhinī* in **d**. Most of our mss. accent *apsarásas* in **e**,  
but SPP. reports only one of his as doing so; both editions read  
*apsarasas*. The comm. makes a different division of the material,  
reckoning the refrain (our **e, f**) as a verse with our 4 **a, b**, and  
omitting the refrain in 4 (much as it treated 34. 5-7 above); SPP.  
follows the Anukr. throughout (see under the next verse). The comm.  
reads in **f** *pratibaddhās; prátibuddhā abhūtana* is found also as RV.  
i. 191. 5 **d**. Ppp. adds between our **d** and **e** *yatrā marty apsv  
antaḥ: samudre turūṇyarī turvaśī puṇḍarīka* (not followed by an  
*avasāna*-sign). The Anukr. definition of the verse ought to read  
*jagatī* instead of *triṣṭubh*. ⌊in the prior draft, W. notes the  
suggestions concerning *avaśvasám* given by BR. i. 490 and OB. i. 126  
and implying *ava* = 'away'; but rejects them.⌋
</details>

<details><summary>Griffith</summary>

Let the Apsarases, puffed away, go to the river, to the ford,-- Guggulu, Pila, Naladi, Aukshagandhi, Pramandini. Ye have become attentive since the Apsarases have past away.
</details>
