+++
title = "०३ इन्द्रस्तुराषाण्मित्रो वृत्रम्"

+++

<details><summary>Whitney</summary>

### Translation
3. Indra, a swiftly-overcoming friend, who slew Vritra—like moving  
\[streams\]—, \[who\] split Vala—like Bhṛgu—, who overpowered his foes  
in the intoxication of soma.

### Notes
The translation follows closely our text, though this, as the other  
versions show, is badly corrupted in **a, b**, even to the partial  
effacement of the first interpolation. The others read accordantly:  
*índras turāṣā́ṇ mitró ná jaghā́na vṛtráṁ yátir ná;* our *yatī́r* may  
possibly be meant for *yátīn* 'as he did the Yatis.' The comm. explains  
*yatī́s* first as *āsuryaḥ prajāḥ*, then as *parivrājakāḥ*. Ppp. agrees  
with the other texts, only omitting the interpolations: *indras turāṣāḍ  
jaghāna vṛtram;* it then omits the third pāda, and goes on thus: *sasāhā  
śatrūn mamuś ca: vajrīr made somasya.* All the AV. mss. read *sasahe*,  
unaccented, and SPP. admits this into his text; our edition makes the  
necessary emendation to *sasahé* ⌊in some copies (and so the *Index  
Verborum*); in others the accent-mark has slipped to the right⌋; the  
other texts rectify the meter by reading *sasāhé* (our O. agrees with  
them as regards the *ā*). Words of verses 2 and 3 are quoted in the  
Prāt. comment, but not in a way to cast any light upon the readings.  
⌊SPP., with most of his authorities and our Op., reads *valám.*⌋ The  
metrical definition of the Anukr. is of course senseless; it apparently  
implies the division 9 + 7: 8 + 10 = 34 syllables.
</details>

<details><summary>Griffith</summary>

Swift-conquering Indra, Mitra like, smote, as a Yati, Vritra dead. Like Bhrigu he cleft Vala through, and quelled his foes in Soma's rapturous joy.
</details>
