+++
title = "०४ आ त्वा"

+++

<details><summary>Whitney</summary>

### Translation
4. Let the pressed \[somas\] enter thee, O Indra; fill thy (two)  
paunches; help, O mighty one! for our prayer (*dhī́*) come to us; hear  
\[my\] call, enjoy my songs; hither, O Indra, with self-harnessed  
\[steeds\]; revel here unto great joy.

### Notes
This verse is really, as AśS. plainly shows, made up of two like the  
preceding three, of five five-syllabled pādas each, but without  
interpolations. The first half-verse is vs. 5 in AśS., where it reads  
thus: *ā tvā viśantu kavir na sutāsa indra tvaṣṭā na: pṛṇasva kukṣī somo  
nā 'viḍhḍhi śūra dhiyā hiyānaḥ.* Of the two versions of the last pada,  
that of AśS. is doubtless the original, though ours (the *pada* has  
*dhiyā́ ā́ ihi ā́ naḥ*) is ingenious enough to give a fair sense; the  
reading *dhiyéhi* is authenticated by the Prāt. comment, which quotes it  
more than once (to iii. 38; iv. 113-115). The translation implies the  
restoration of *aviḍḍhí*, as the only true reading ⌊namely, an aorist  
imperative from *av*—see *Skt. Gram.*² §908⌋; the mss. all read  
*viḍhḍhí*, which SPP's edition as well as ours properly emends to  
*viḍḍhí.* ⌊My copy of the printed text reads *viḍhḍhí;* but Whitney's  
*Index Verborum* and his *Roots, Verb-forms, etc.* have *viḍḍhí*, under  
*viṣ.*⌋ The comm. reads *vṛḍḍhi*, explaining it by *vardhaya!* The  
second half-verse is rather more altered in its AV. version; in AśS. (as  
vs. 4), with the interpolations, it runs thus: *śrudhī havaṁ na indro na  
giro juṣasva vajrī na: indra sayugbhir didyun na matsvā madāya mahe  
raṇāya.* Ppp. has only this half-verse (without the interpolations),  
reading thus: *śruti hava me kiro juṣasya indrasya gubhir matsa madāya  
mahe raṇāya.* The Anukr. would doubtless have us divide 10 + 13: 10 + 13  
= 46 syllables. ⌊As to *viḍhḍhí*, see notes to Prāt. i. 94. Accent of  
*mátsva*, *Gram.* §628.⌋ We may conjecture that the hymn originally  
ended here, as one of five verses; the appended three verses that follow  
are of a wholly other character. AśS. adds one more verse, which is RV.  
i. 70. 11, with similar interpolations after each of its four  
five-syllabled pādas.
</details>

<details><summary>Griffith</summary>

O Indra, let the juices enter thee. Fill full thy belly, sate thee, mighty one! Let the hymn bring thee. Hear thou my call, accept the song I sing, here, Indra, with thy friends enjoy thyself, to height of rapture.
</details>
