+++
title = "०१ अव्यसश्च व्यचसश्च"

+++

<details><summary>Whitney</summary>

### Translation
1. Of non-expansion and of expansion do I untie the aperture with magic;  
by those two having taken up the Veda, we then perform acts.

### Notes
  
  
  
  
  
That is, doubtless, 'conduct sacred ceremonies.' All the mss.\* have at  
the beginning *ávyasas* (p. *ávi॰asaḥ*), and so have Ppp., the Anukr.,  
Kāuś. and all its scholiasts, and the comm.; whence of course also SPP.;  
it is unquestionably the Atharvan reading. Yet even the comm. can only  
say for it that it is the same as *avyacasas*, a syllable being omitted  
by Vedic license; and the analysis of the *pada*-text appears to be one  
of those wild and senseless guesses of which in this book it presents  
not a few examples. ⌊The important thing to observe in the pāda  
*avya*\[*ca*\]*saś ca vyacasaś ca* is the recurrence of so many  
confusingly similar syllables: the corruption is a case of haplography  
(cf. note to iv. 5. 5, and Bloomfield in AJP. xvii. 418); but one would  
expect *avyacaso vyacasaś ca*. The *pada*-mss. ⌊save SPP's J.⌋ have  
*víṣyāmi* in **b** as an integral word; but the comm. understands *ví:  
syāmi*, and SPP., as well as our text, so reads; many of the mss. have  
*bí* instead of *ví*. One accents in **c** *vedám*, ⌊and one has  
*vedam*, without accent; Griffith's 'bunch of grass' implies the reading  
*vedám* here and at 72. 1⌋; we might conjecture *védim* as a better  
reading; *véda* is not to be expected in the Atharvan. ⌊The *Index*  
gives for books i.-xviii. three occurrences of *véda*, namely at iv. 35.  
6; x. 8. 17; xv. 3. 7: at x. 8. 17 W. suggests that it is perhaps to be  
rendered simply by 'knowledge'; but in iv. and xv. it can hardly be  
aught else than 'Veda.'⌋ Some of the mss. accent *kṛṇmáhe*. There was no  
sufficient reason for altering the accent of *vyácasas* in our text to  
*vyacásas;* SPP. reads *vyác-* with the majority of his authorities. The  
comm. has no notion of what the verse really means: he gives two  
different expositions—one explaining *ávyacas* and *vyácas* to mean the  
two varieties of breathing, *prāṇa* and *vyāna*, the *bila* to be the  
*mūlādhāra*, and *veda* 'the Veda' (*akṣarātmakamantrasaṁgha*); the  
other taking the first two to be the *paramātman* and *jīvātman*, the  
*bila* the heart, and *veda* 'knowledge' (*cikīrṣitakarmaviṣayaṁ  
jñānam*). \*⌊If I understand the Collation Book, W's P. actually begins  
with *avyacásaś cá vyácasáś ca*, which, apart from the wild accents, is  
worth noting.⌋  
  
In Ppp., this hymn is immediately followed by our hymn 72.
</details>

<details><summary>Griffith</summary>

Both of broad and narrow I with magic power unclose the mouth. With these when we have raised the bunch of grass we pay the holy rites.
</details>
