+++
title = "०२ यद्यर्चिर्यदि वासि"

+++

<details><summary>Whitney</summary>

### Translation
2. If thou art flame (*arcís*) or if heat (*śocís*), or if thy  
birth-place seeks the shavings (?), *hrū́ḍu* by name art thou, O god of  
the yellow one; then do thou, O fever, complaisant, avoid us.

### Notes
The *pada*-reading *śakalya॰eṣí* in **b** is assured by Prāt. iii. 52,  
but the meaning is extremely obscure. Ppp. has the better reading  
*śākalyeṣu* 'among the shavings'; *janitram* rather requires a locative.  
The comm. guesses it as loc. of *śakalyeṣ*, from *śakalya* explained as  
a "heap of shavings," and root *iṣ* 'seek,' and so an epithet of fire;  
BR. conjecture "following the shaving, i.e: glimmering." Ppp. reads in  
**a** *dhūmas* for *śocis*. The name at the beginning of **c** is of  
quite uncertain form; the ms. readings are *hrūḍu, hrūdru, hruḍu, hūḍu,  
rūḍu, hrudbhu, hruḍu, rūḍhu* ⌊*hrūḍhu*⌋; SPP. adopts in his text the  
same form as we, and, it is to be hoped, on the authority of his oral  
reciters, which in such a case must be better than mss.; Ppp. has (in  
both verses) *huḍu*, which is a word occurring also elsewhere, and  
meaning "ram"; the comm. reads *rūḍhu*, explaining it as = *rohaka* or  
*puruṣaśarīre utpādaka* 'producing in the human body.' ⌊Henry, *Journal  
Asiatique*, 9. x. 513, suggests that the problematic word may be  
connected with the Assyrian *ḥuraśu* and the Hebrew *ḥarūś*, and so go  
back to a proto-Semitic *\*ḥarūḍu*, 'gold.'⌋. Halévy, however. l.c., 9.  
xi. 320 ff., suggests that it may be rather a Sanskritization of  
*χλωρός*, 'greenish-yellow,' and compares the relations of *vāiḍūrya*,  
Prākrit *veḷurya* (*veruliya*) *βηρύλλιον*. Cf. further, Barth, *Revue  
de l'histoire des religions*, xxxix. 26.⌋
</details>

<details><summary>Griffith</summary>

If thou be fiery glow, or inflammation, or if thy birthplace call for chips of fuel, Rack is thy name, God of the sickly yellow! O Fever, yielding to our prayer avoid us.
</details>
