+++
title = "०२ उदीर्ष्व नार्यभि"

+++

<details><summary>Whitney</summary>

### Translation
2. Go up, O woman, to the world of the living; thou liest by (*upa-śī*)  
this one who is deceased: come! to him who grasps thy hand, thy second  
spouse (*didhiṣú*), thou hast now entered into the relation of wife to  
husband.

### Notes
  
  
  
  
  
The verse is RV. x. 18. 8, whose text differs only by reading in **c**  
*didhiṣós*, and this is given also by two of our mss. (R.D.) and the  
majority of SPP's, so that it certainly ought to be accepted as the true  
reading, *dadh-* being only a corruption. TA. (in vi. 1. 3) has  
*didhiṣós*, but after it *tvám etát*, and in **b** *itā́sum*, in neither  
case making any important change in the sense. ⌊TA., both text and comm.  
in both ed's, reads *abhí sámbabhūva:* the comm. renders by  
*ābhimukhyena samyak prāpnuhi!* which procedure gives a shock even to  
one who is wonted to the Hindu laxity of ideas about *vāiyadhikaraṇya*.⌋  
The meaning given to *abhí sám-bhū* in the translation is decidedly the  
only admissible one; nor need one hesitate to render *didhiṣú* according  
to its later accepted meaning. The woman cannot be left free and  
independent; she can only be relieved of her former wifehood by taking  
up a new one (even if this be, as is probable enough, nominal only); he  
who grasps her hand to lead her down from the pile becomes, at least for  
the nonce, her husband. The direction of Kāuś. (80. 45) in connection  
with the verse is simply "one makes her rise"; the comm. ⌊vol. iv., p.  
129, end⌋ specifies that this is done "if she desires to live in this  
world again"; neither tells who is to take her hand—as, for example,  
Āśvalāyana does (AGS. iv. 2. 18): "her husband's brother, a  
representative of her husband, a pupil \[of her husband\], or an aged  
servant." ⌊Whether the *levir* and the "representative" are the same  
person or two different ones does not appear from the translation nor  
from the original of AGS.⌋ Vāit. (38. 3) uses the verse in the  
*puruṣamedha*.
</details>

<details><summary>Griffith</summary>

Rise, come unto the world of life, O woman: come, he is lifeless by whose side thou liest. Wifehood with this thy husband was thy portion who took thy hand and wooed thee as a lover.
</details>
