+++
title = "०५ उप द्यामुप"

+++

<details><summary>Whitney</summary>

### Translation
5. Unto sky (*div*), unto reed, more helpful of streams; O Agni, gall of  
the waters art thou.

### Notes
The translation of **a** and **b** is purely mechanical. Other texts  
have a quite different version of them. VS. (xvii. 6 **a-c**) reads *úpa  
jmánn úpa vetasé ’vatara nadī́ṣv ā́;* MS. (in ii. 10. 1; but p.  
*ávataram*) the same (and the editor reports K. and Kap.S. as agreeing);  
TS. (in iv. 6. 1²) the same except *ávattaram;* VS. and MS. admit a much  
more intelligible rendering ('close to earth, close to reeds, descend  
thou in the streams'). In all the other texts, the verse is preceded by  
our vi. 106. 3 **a, b** and other similar addresses to Agni, in the  
*agnicayana* ceremony; and so also in Vāit. (29. 13), where the verses  
accompany the drawing of a frog, of the water-plant *avakā*, and of  
reeds, across the fire-site in all directions. In Kāúś. (82. 26), this  
verse and 3. 60 are used in. the ceremony of gathering the bone-relics  
on the third day after cremation, with the direction *iti mantroktāny  
avadāya*. ⌊The authorities differ as to the day: Caland,  
Todtengebräuche, p. 99.⌋ The comm. explains ⌊vol. iv., p. 132¹⁵, p.  
169²⁰⌋ that vss. 5 and 6 ⌊(cf. Ath. Paddhati cited in note to Kāuś. 82.  
26)⌋ ⌊and 60⌋ are addressed to the plants mentioned in those verses ⌊and  
gives a list of plants: cf. SPP's note with extract from Keśava, and  
Bloomfield's note to 82. 26⌋. The comm. adds that the plants are used by  
the performer in besprinkling a Brahman's bones with milk. Under this  
verse the comm. makes *dyām* mean *avakām*, because this rises above the  
water without touching earth! The verse does not need to be scanned as  
*nicṛt*.
</details>

<details><summary>Griffith</summary>

The speed of rivers craving heaven and cane, thou, Agni, art the waters' gall.
</details>
