+++
title = "१६ विश्वामित्र जमदग्ने"

+++

<details><summary>Whitney</summary>

### Translation
16. O Viśvāmitra, Jamadagni, Vasishṭha, Bharadvāja, Gotama,  
Vāmadeva—Atri hath taken (*grabh*) our *śardís* with obeisances; ye  
Fathers of good report, be gracious to us.

### Notes
The translation implies in **d** emendation of *sú-saṁśāsas* to  
*suśaṅsasas* ⌊so W's ms.! it must certainly be a double slip for  
*súśaṅsāsas*⌋, for which it seems most probably a corruption, and which  
is read by the comm. ⌊he reads in fact *suśaṅsāsas*, and understands it  
as W. does⌋; the only variants in the mss. are *súśaṅśāsas* ⌊with  
palatal ś twice⌋ in some of ours (P.M.I.) and one (C.) of SPP's, and the  
accentuation on the second syllable, *-sáṁś-*, in a few (including our  
O.R.T.).\* *Pítaras* in **b** ought properly to be without accent. ⌊As  
to what precedes, see the next ¶.⌋ Some of the mss. read *śárdir* or  
*śárdír*. The comm. first identifies the word with *chardis*, and  
pronounces it a name for 'house'; then, as alternative, he gets it from  
root *śard* and makes *śardayati* signify *balayati;* ⌊and, as a final  
alternative, he regards the word as the name of a Rishi⌋. Neither Kāuś.  
nor Vāit. makes any use of these two verses. ⌊Weber, *Episches im  
vedischen Ritual*, *Sb.* 1891, p. 787, suggests a special connection of  
this book xviii. with the Kāuśikan Viśvāmitras.⌋  
  
\*⌊The decision here lies between the well-authenticated *su-śáṅsa* ('of  
good wishes, kindly': root *śaṅs*) and the doubtful *su-saṁśās* ('kindly  
admonishing,' presumably oxytone: root *śās* with *sam*). The former  
occurs five times in RV. and also at AV. xix. 10. 6. The latter occurs  
nowhere, unless here, nor does it seem to be apposite in meaning: yet  
the authority of the mss. and of the *śrotriya* V. is decidedly in favor  
of it. No ms. soever actually gives *súśaṅsāsas;* but the mss. that have  
the impossible *súśaṅśāsas* may well be regarded as intending  
*súśaṅsāsas*.—Moreover, if the two vocatives stood in the order *pítaraḥ  
su-*, I should leave the second one unaccented (*Gram.* §314 d), as W.  
suggests; but with the order *sú- pít-*, the second seems distinctly  
more independent of the first (*Gram.* §314 e) and may properly be  
accented. I would therefore read *súśaṅsāṣaḥ pítaraḥ*, and render 'O ye  
kindly ones, ye Fathers!' As for the meaning of *suśáṅsa:* note that  
*śáṅsa* means 'a wish, good *or* evil,' i.e. not only 'curse,' but also  
'blessing,' and is used in these two opposite senses in two contiguous  
RV. verses, vii. 25. 2, 3; and that, in its good sense, it is pertinent  
to the Fathers, as at RV. x. 78. 3, *pitṝṇā́ṁ ná śáṅsāḥ surātáyaḥ*. Note  
further that 'kindly' accords well with the character of the Fathers as  
described in RV. x. 15: they bless and help (vss. 5 **d**, 4 **c**), and  
are harmless (1 **c**, 6 **c**) and gracious (3 **a**, 9 **c**).—That,  
in such a "pestilent congregation of" sibilants as *súśaṅsāsas*, a  
blunder of the tradition is rather to be expected than not, is my  
opinion: whoso doubts it, let him attempt "with moderate haste" to  
repeat aloud three times the simple English sentence "she sells  
sea-shells."⌋
</details>

<details><summary>Griffith</summary>

Vasishtha, Jamadagni, Visvamitra, Gotama, Vamadeva, Bhara- dvaja! Atri hath won your favour with homage. Gracious to us be ye praiseworthy Fathers.
</details>
