+++
title = "२३ आ यूथेव"

+++

<details><summary>Whitney</summary>

### Translation
23. As herds at food (*kṣúm*), the formidable one hath looked over  
⌊*áti*⌋ the cattle, the births of the gods, near by; mortals have  
lamented the *urváśīs*, unto the increase of the pious, of the next man.

### Notes
The translation is purely mechanical, and sundry of the words in it are  
extremely questionable. The verse corresponds to RV. iv. 2. 18, which,  
however, reads in **a** *kṣumáti* as one word (p. *kṣu॰máti;* our p.  
*kṣúm: áti*), makes good meter in **b** by inserting *yát* after  
*devā́nām*, and reads in **c** *mártānām*. SPP. reads, with RV. and with  
the comm., *kṣumáti;* this is against nearly all his and our  
authorities; ⌊they have *kṣúm áti*⌋; but our O.R. have *kṣumáti* and Op.  
has ⌊the impossible⌋ *kṣum: áti* ⌊with accentless *kṣum*⌋. The  
translation implies at the end of **b** *ugrás*, which SPP. reads, with  
about half his authorities and the comm.; of ours, most of the later  
ones have it also (Op.D. *ugráḥ;* O.R.K. ugraḥ ⌊accentless!⌋). The  
comm. renders **a, b** thus: "the mighty one, Agni, looks near by upon  
the birth of the gods, Indra etc., as in a noisy (*kṣumati* =  
*śabdavati*) herd (*yūthā* being = *yūthe*) of kine a master sees his  
own cattle (*paśvas*)": or, he says, it is the consuming fire that is  
addressed: "O Agni, this sacrificer who is being consumed by thee,  
mighty by thy favor, in a noisy cattle-crowd, looks upon the birth of  
the gods as upon herds of cattle (*paśvas*); the sense being that the  
gods come to light in the neighborhood of him who has gone to the world  
of the gods." This is the kind of help that the commentator gives in a  
difficult passage. *Urváśīs* is to him the Apsarases, Urvaśī etc.; and  
*akṛpran* = *akalpayan*, which means *upabhoktuṁ samarthā bhavanti*.  
*Aryás* = *svāmī*. The verse can be forced into the compass of forty  
syllables (11 + 8: 10 + 11 = 40), as the Anukr. estimates it. \*⌊The RV.  
verse has been discussed by Bloomfield, JAOS. xx.¹, p. 183. He renders  
**c, d** thus: "Even for mortal men Urvaśīs ere fashioned for the  
production of the noble lower Āyu." He takes *akṛpran* as 'there were  
formed,' aor. pass. of *kṛp* = *kḷp:* of. the *akalpayan* of our comm.  
and the *kḷptās* of Sāyaṇa on RV. He explains: Just as Urvaśī, the  
goddess Cloud, produces the celestial fire, so the fire-drills (called  
*urváśīs*) produce for mortals the terrestrial sacrificial fire (*úpara  
āyú*).
</details>

<details><summary>Griffith</summary>

Strong One! he marked them, and the gods before them, like herds of cattle in a foodful pasture. There man moaned forth their strong desires, to strengthen even the true; the nearest One, the living.
</details>
