+++
title = "२५ इन्द्रो मा"

+++

<details><summary>Whitney</summary>

### Translation
25. Let Indra with the Maruts protect me from the eastern quarter;  
arm-moved \[is\] the earth, as it were to the sky above; to the  
world-makers, the road-makers, do we sacrifice, whoever of you are here,  
sharing in the oblation of the gods.

### Notes
⌊As for this whole passage, vss. 25-37, see my introductory notes, p.  
847, ¶ 8, and Caland's orientation of it in his *Todtengebräuche*, p.  
154.⌋ This is a very curious and obscure refrain (its last two pādas  
occur again as refrain of 4. 16-24). In **b**, *bāhucyútā*(which ought  
to mean 'by a mover, or a moving, of arms') is rendered as if it were  
*bāhúcyutā;* ⌊Weber proposes to emend to *-tām;*⌋the comm. also takes  
*-cyutā* as past pass. pple., glossing it by *vinirgatā*, or, in an  
alternative explanation, by *prāptā:* either "proceeded out from the  
arms of the givers" or "arrived in the arms of the receivers"; the  
allusion being to the giving of land to Brahmans: "as land given  
protects in the future (*upári*) the heavenly world which is to be  
enjoyed by both parties"! The use by the *sūtras* casts no light upon  
the meaning. Vāit. (22. 3) prescribes the verse for use with an offering  
to the Maruts in the *agniṣṭoma* ceremony ⌊doubtless on account of the  
word *marutvān*⌋. In Kāuś. (81. 39), this verse alone, so far as appears  
⌊but the comm., p. 152⁵, says vss. 25-29⌋, is combined with 1. 41-43  
etc. to accompany the offerings to Sarasvatī at the funeral pile; again  
(85. 26), vss. 25-37 (the comm. says, 25-35) are used with 2. 24, 26,  
etc. in connection with the interment of the bone-relics. ⌊This last use  
does indeed perhaps cast light on the passage. The previous *sūtra*, 85.  
25, with Caland's emendation (l.c., p. 154), reads: *edam barhir*  
\[xviii. 4. 52\] *ity* *asthitas tanuṁ yathāparu saṁcinoti*. I think  
his emendation receives support from the AV. comm., who says, at vol.  
iv., p. 224⁶, *edam barliir ity ṛcā kule jyeṣṭho ‘sthīni yathāparu  
saṁcinuyāt*. If we take *sam-ci* in the sense of 'assemble' as used in  
the phrase 'assemble the interchangeable parts of a bicycle or a Waltham  
watch,' our *sūtra* would then mean, 'while repeating xviii. 4. 52, he  
(the dead man's eldest son) assembles a human figure (*tanum*), limb by  
limb, from the bones (*asthi-tas*), *i.e.* he makes such a figure out of  
the bones by assembling them.'—If this be right, then we probably have  
to infer from the AV. text and from the next *sūtra*, 85. 26, that the  
eldest son addresses the deities with vss. 25-29, and does so as  
spokesman of his dead father, represented by the prostrate figure of  
bones; and that, while uttering vss. 30-35, he addresses his dead  
father, but does so as speaking for himself.—-As to forming a human  
figure (*puruṣākṛti*) with the bones, cf. further Bāudhāyana's  
*Pitṛmedhasūtra*, i. 10, especially lines 5, 7, 10, 13 of p. 15, ed.  
Caland.⌋
</details>

<details><summary>Griffith</summary>

From eastward Indra, Lord or Maruts, guard me, as in her arms Earth guards the heaven above us! Those who give room, who made the paths, we worship, you, mid the Gods, who share the gifts we offer.
</details>
