+++
title = "३८ इतश्च मामुतश्चावतां"

+++

<details><summary>Whitney</summary>

### Translation
38. Both from here and from yonder let them (du.) aid me.

### Notes
As ye (du.) ⌊neut.⌋ went pressing on (root *yat*) like two twins,  
god-loving men (*mā́nuṣa*) bring you forward; sit ye, \[each\] on thine  
own place, knowing \[it\];—  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
⌊See my added note just preceding the translation of verse 38.⌋ In this  
and the three following verses we have the ⌊entire⌋ RV. hymn x. 13,  
⌊except its last verse, the fifth, and⌋ except its vs. 1 **d**. ⌊See  
introduction, page 848, top.⌋ This verse is its 2 **a, b, c** ⌊its **d**  
follows at the beginning of our next verse⌋, with a pāda prefixed as our  
**a** that forms no part of the RV. hymn. The first two verses are  
addressed to the two *havirdhānas*, or vehicles or vessels in which the  
soma-stalks are brought to the place of pressing; ⌊cf. our comm., p.  
158, and Sāyaṇa on RV.⌋. The reason of the introduction of the hymn here  
is altogether obscure (unless it be the occurrence of the word *yama* in  
38 **b**), and Kāuś. has no use for it. In **a**, our mss., so far as  
noted, accent *mā́*, but SPP. mentions ⌊only one⌋ among his ⌊as reading  
*mā́*⌋; and both editions give *mā*, as is undoubtedly correct. RV., in  
**b**, accents *āítam*, which, of course, is alone grammatically  
possible; but both AV. editions have *āitám*, with all the mss. TA. (in  
vi. 5. 1) also has the verse, and differs from RV. only in having  
*étam:* ⌊so, indeed, the Calc. ed., text and comm.! *étam* (not *etám*,  
pron.) can only be an imperative: but the Poona ed., text and comm., has  
*āítam*, like RV.⌋. Our text has *sīdatam* in **d**, with RV. and a part  
of our mss. (not O.Op.R.D.K. ⌊which read badly *-tām*⌋); but SPP. admits  
*-tām*, in spite of its inappropriateness, because ⌊*-tam* is supported  
by⌋ only one of his authorities and the comm. ⌊Is the consentaneousness  
of the mss. in the blundering *-tām* possibly due to a reminiscence of  
the correct *āsīdatām* of the immediately preceding context in TA.? cf.  
the case at x. 6. 17, and note.⌋ *Vídāne* might be from *vid* 'find';  
the comm. glosses it with *jānatī*. One might conjecture that *āítam* in  
**b** is for *ā॰āítam* 'came,' but neither *pada*-text views it in that  
way. The verse cannot be made a full *triṣṭubh* without violent  
resolutions in the first pāda—which is, of course, properly prose.  
⌊Considering the textual inaccuracies in the tradition of this passage,  
perhaps it is not too bold to suggest the query whether a *mā* has been  
lost: *itáś ca mā amútaś cāvatām mā* would be a perfect *triṣṭubh*  
pāda.⌋ Vāit. (15. 11) makes vss. 38 and 39 accompany in the *agniṣṭoma*  
ceremony the driving up of the two *havirdhānas*.
</details>

<details><summary>Griffith</summary>

From this side and from that let both assist me. As, speeding, ye have come like two twin sisters, Religious-hearted votaries brought you forward. Knowing your several places be ye seated.
</details>
