+++
title = "४० त्रीणि पदानि"

+++

<details><summary>Whitney</summary>

### Translation
40. Three steps the form (?) ascended, it went (?) after the four-footed  
one (f.) with its course (*vratá*); it matches the song (*arká*) with  
the syllable; in the navel of right it purifies.

### Notes
The translation is purely mechanical, the verse being highly obscure,  
and its AV. version evidently corrupt. RV. (x. 13. 3) reads in **a**  
*páñca* (for *trī́ṇi*) and *aroham*, in **b** *emi* for the absurd  
*āitat* (apparently a blundering extension\* of *āit*), at end of **c**  
*mima etā́m*, and in **d** *ádhi* (our *abhí* has to be omitted in  
translation) *sám punāmi*. It also has in **a** *rupás*, which SPP.  
admits in his text on the authority of the majority of his mss. and of  
the comm. (the latter takes it from root *rup*, and makes it mean  
*mṛtaḥ* *puruṣaḥ*); some of our later mss. (O.Op.R.D.) also give it,  
and it is to be regarded as the preferable reading, if there is such a  
thing in this case. In **b**, SPP. strangely reads in his *saṁhitā*-text  
*āitad vr-* and in his *pada*-text *etat*, his *pada*-'mss. having  
*etat* or *āit*—both, doubtless, by accidental misreadings\*; the comm.,  
however, gives *etat*, and makes it qualify *vratena*, being itself =  
*etena!* For *nābhāu* in **d** the comm. has *yonāu*. \*⌊If *āitat* is a  
"blundering extension of *āit*" one does not see why W. calls the  
*pada*-reading *āit* "an accidental misreading."—Meantime, in Oertel's  
edition of JUB., published in JAOS. xvi., we find (i. 48, p. 125-6) *sa  
hāi ’vaṁ ṣoḍaśadhā ”tmānaṁ vikṛtya, sārdhaṁ samāit. tad yat sārdhaṁ  
samāitat, tat sāmnas sāmatvam;* and (iii. 38, p. 197) *tā ṛcaś śarīreṇa  
mṛtyur anvāitat. tad yat* etc. On p. 234, Oertel suggests that we might  
regard *samāitat* and *anvāitat* as due to dittography of the following  
*tat*, "were it not for AV. xviii. 3. 40, *anvāitat*, which is protected  
by the meter." Cf. also Henry, *Revue Critique*, 1894, no's 39-40, p.  
146.—See also SPP's full critical notes upon the verse, p. 160. It may  
be added that W's O. gives *-padīmáṁnvāítád*, and his Op. *ánu: āitát*.⌋
</details>

<details><summary>Griffith</summary>

Three paces hath the stake gone up, and followed her, the four- footed, with devout observance. He with the Syllable copies the praise-song; he thoroughly purifies at Order's centre.
</details>
