+++
title = "४६ ये नः"

+++

<details><summary>Whitney</summary>

### Translation
46. They who, our father's fathers, who \[his\] grandfathers, followed  
after (? *anu-hā*) the soma-drinking, best ones—with them let Yama,  
sharing his gift of oblations, he eager with them eager, eat at  
pleasure.

### Notes
The verse is RV. x. 15. 8 (and VS. xix. 51, which has the same text with  
RV.); this, however, reads for **a**: *yé naḥ pū́rve pitáraḥ somyā́saḥ*.  
In **b** our text gives, with RV. VS. *anūhiré* (RV. p. *anu॰ūhiré*),  
but it is by emendation, for all our mss. have *anujahiré* or  
*anūjahiré*, p. *anu॰jahīré;* ⌊the actual details seem to be as follows:  
*anujahiré* is given by Bp.P.D., while O.Op.R. have *anujahīré;* and  
*anūjahiré* is given by Bs.M.T., while K. has *anūjahīré*.⌋ ⌊SPP's  
authorities show the same four varying forms of the word:⌋ he reads  
*anūjahiré*, p. *anu॰jahiré*, although the majority ⌊five⌋ of his  
*saṁhitā*-authorities and the comm. have the preferable *anujah-* ⌊as  
against three with *anūjah-*⌋. Our translation implies the manuscript  
reading, though it is plainly a corruption of what RV. gives. ⌊Whether  
we read *anujahiré* (from *anu-hā*) or *anūhiré* (from *anu-vah:*  
Sāyaṇa, *ānupūrvyeṇa...dattavantaḥ;* Mahīdhara, *anuvahanti;* Weber,  
'welche nachgezogen sind'), in either case the sense is about the same.⌋  
The comm. treats the word as if it came from root *hṛ: anukrameṇa  
haranty ātmasāt kurvanti*. It looks a little as if the text-makers had  
in mind the root *jeh*, found in the next verse. The use of the verse  
with its two predecessors in Kāuś. was noted under vs. 44. It is very  
unsuitably reckoned by the Anukr. a jagatī, having only one real  
*jagatī* pāda; ⌊it scans perfectly as 12 + 11: 11 + 11; the corruption  
*anujahire* gives **b** 12 syllables, but no true *jagatī* character⌋.  
⌊W's version of **c** accords with Geldner's at *Ved. Stud.* i. 170  
note.⌋
</details>

<details><summary>Griffith</summary>

Our Father's Fathers and their sires before them who came, most noble, to the Soma banquet, With these let Yama, yearning with the yearning, rejoicing eat our offerings at his pleasure.
</details>
