+++
title = "५५ यत् ते"

+++

<details><summary>Whitney</summary>

### Translation
55. What of thee the black bird (*śakuná*) thrust at, the ant, the  
serpent, or also the beast of prey (*śvā́pada*), let the all-eating  
⌊*viśva-ád*⌋ Agni make that free from disease, and the soma that hath  
entered the Brahmans.

### Notes
The verse is RV. x. 16. 6 without variant. TA. has it also, in vi. 4. 2.  
TA. reads in **c** ⌊for *viśvā́d* ('all-consuming') *agadám*, the  
curiously perverted⌋ *víśvād* ('from every') *anṛṇám* ⌊which is glossed  
by *sarvasmād upadravād ṛṇarahitam upadravarahitam*⌋. In **d** it has  
*brāhmaṇám* (also, in the printed ⌊Calc.⌋ text, *āvivíśeṣa;* but its  
comm. ⌊Calc.⌋ explains *brāhmaṇe* and *āviveśa*); ⌊in the Poona ed. the  
comm. seems to show an alternative reading, either *brāhmaṇe* or  
*brāhmaṇam*, glossed by *etadīye brāhmaṇaśarīre;* and it reads of course  
*āviveśa*⌋. ⌊Our *pratīka* is cited by Keśava, p. 368¹⁰, as *yat te  
kṛṣṇaḥ śakunīty ṛcā:* is *śakunī* a blunder? cf. *idáṁ yát kṛṣṇáḥ  
śakúnis*, vii. 64. 1, 2.⌋  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
In Kāuś. the verse is used (80. 5) in the very introduction of the  
*adhyāya*, before the handling of the corpse begins; and Keśava says it  
is in case the man dies of the bite of a crow or ant or the like; the  
comm. makes the same condition, and adds that the wounded place is to be  
burned with fire; this is then probably the meaning of Kāuśika's  
direction *ity avadīpayati*. The verse appears again (83. 20) in  
connection with the strewing and covering of the bone-relics.
</details>

<details><summary>Griffith</summary>

What wound soe'er the dark bird hath inflicted, the emmet, or the serpent, or the jackal, May Agni who devoureth all things heal it, and Soma, who hath passed into the Brahmans.
</details>
