+++
title = "६३ यो दध्रे"

+++

<details><summary>Whitney</summary>

### Translation
63 . He who maintains himself by his might, like \[birds?\] in the  
atmosphere, poet of the Fathers, favorer (? *prámati*) of prayers  
(*matí*)—him praise ye, all-befriended, with oblations; may that Yama  
give (*dhā*) us to live further on.

### Notes
The reading in the first pāda is doubtful; our text has *antárikṣeṇa*,  
but the other edition *-kṣe ná*. Bp. and Op. read *antárikṣe: ná,* and  
so, apparently, SPP's *pada*-mss. but our D.K. have *-kṣeṇa*, and with  
it agree our P.M.I., while O.R.T., though they give *na*, do not accent  
it; SPP's mss. are somewhat similarly at variance. The commentator's  
interpretation is an interpretation of *antarikṣeṇa;* but his text  
(according to SPP.) reads *-kṣe na*. Only the sense can decide, and that  
is quite doubtful; the translation ventured above implies *-kṣe ná*. The  
second half-verse occurs again below as 4. 54 **c, d**. One is tempted  
to understand *viśvámitrās* ⌊so accented in both ed's with all the  
authorities⌋ in **c** as 'O Viśvāmitras'; but this is so decidedly  
opposed by the accent and by the short vowel of the second syllable  
(which is authenticated by the *pada*-reading *viśvá॰mitrāḥ*, while  
*viśvā́mitra* is never divided: see Prāt. iii. 9 and note) that I have  
not dared to assume it; ⌊but the comm., ignoring these considerations,  
takes it as voc. For the verse in general,⌋ the comm., as usual in a  
trying case, gives no help whatever; he glosses *pramati* with  
*prakṛṣṭabuddhi*, and *mati* with *mantṛ* or *stotṛ*, in apposition with  
*pitṝṇām*; and he makes *antarikṣeṇa dadhre* mean (*pitṝn*) *antarā  
kṣāntena lokena dhārayati*.
</details>

<details><summary>Griffith</summary>

The Sage of Fathers, guardian of devotions who holds thee up with might in air's mid-region,-- Praise him ye Visvamitras, with oblation. To lengthened life shall be, this Yama, lead us.
</details>
