+++
title = "०३ त्रिंशद् धामा"

+++

<details><summary>Whitney</summary>

### Translation
3. Thirty domains (*dhā́man*) he rules over; voice, the bird, hath set  
up, to meet the day with the lights of morning.

### Notes
This translation is one of despair, and of no value, like the others  
that are given of the verse. Taken by itself, the first pāda is well  
enough, and seems most naturally (as noted above) to refer to the thirty  
days of the moon's synodical revolution, or spaces of the sky traversed  
by it in them; to understand it of the thirty divisions of the day  
(*muhūrta*) looks like an anachronism; and thirty gods (Ludwig) is  
wholly senseless. ⌊Roth observes: Ushas, in returning to her point of  
departure, traverses thirty *yojanas* (RV. i. 123. 8): the path of the  
light around the world thus appears to be divided into thirty stages.⌋  
The variety of reading of the texts indicates, as in many other like  
cases, the perplexity of the text-makers. RV. (with SV.VS.) has, for  
**b**, *vā́k pataṁgā́ya dhīyate;* TS. and MS. have. *pataṁgā́ya*, but TS.  
follows it with *śiśriye*, and MS. with   
  
{{smaller block\|*hūyate*. Ppp. reads *-gāya su śriyat*. In **c**, RV.  
(etc.) reads *áha*, particle, for *áhas*, and the comm. does the same;  
TS. gives, for the whole pāda, *práty asya vaha dyúbhiḥ;* while MS.  
substitutes our 2 **c**, in its RV. version, having given its wholly  
independent version of this as 2 **c** (see above); Ppp. has at end  
*divi*. In **a**, MS. reads *triṅśáddhāmā*, as compound; the other texts  
(and three of SPP's authorities) have *triṅśád dhā́ma* (the  
*pada*-reading is *dhā́ma*). Both TS. and MS., it may be added, put vs. 3  
before 2.  
  
With this hymn ends the third *anuvāka*, of 11 hymns and 33 verses; the  
extracted item of Anukr. is simply *tṛtīya* (see end of the next  
*anuvāka*).
</details>

<details><summary>Griffith</summary>

He rules supreme through thirty realms--One winged with song hath made him mount Throughout the days at break of morn.
</details>
