+++
title = "०२ महीमू षु"

+++

<details><summary>Whitney</summary>

### Translation
2. We call for aid verily on the great mother of them of good courses,  
the spouse of righteousness (*ṛtá*), on her of mighty authority, not  
growing old, wide-spreading, on the well-sheltering, well-conducting  
Aditi.

### Notes
The verse is also VS. xxi. 5, and is found further in TS. (i. 5. 11⁵),  
MS. (iv. 10. 1), K. (xxx. 4, 5), (śśS. (ii. 2. 14), their only variant  
being (in all) *huvema* for *havāmahe* at end of **b**; and Ppp. has the  
same.  
  
  
  
  
  
  
    
3 (7. 1). The well-preserving earth, the unenvious sky, the  
well-sheltering, well-conducting Aditi, the well-oared ship of the gods,  
unleaking, may we, guiltless, embark on in order to well-being.  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
This verse is also RV. x. 63. 10 (and VS. xxi. 6; TS. i. 5. 11⁵; MS. iv.  
10. 1; K. ii. 3 ⌊cf. MGS. i. 13. 16, and p. 157⌋), which (as also the  
others) reads *ánāgasam* at end of **c**. It and the preceding verse are  
associated in VS.TS.MS., and are so closely kindred in application and  
expression that, numbered as they are as successive verses in Bp., and  
lacking the usual sign of the end of a hymn after vs. 2, we naturally  
enough regarded them as belonging to one continuous hymn. The verse  
lacks but one syllable of a full *jagatī*. ⌊In **c**, Ppp. has  
*suvidatrām* (a faulty reminiscence of *sv-aritrām*) *anāgasam.*⌋  
  
  
  
  
  
  
    
4 (7. 2). Now, in the impulse of might (*vā́ja*), will we commemorate (?  
*karāmahe*) with utterance (*vácas*) the great mother, Aditi by name,  
whose lap is the broad atmosphere; may she confirm to us  
thrice-defending protection.  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
The first half-verse is found also in VS. (ix. 5 b), TS. (i. 7. 7¹), MS.  
(i. 11. 1), without variant; the second half-verse, common to them all,  
is totally different from ours. A whole series of VS. verses begin with  
*vājasya prasava-* (ix. 23-25 etc.): Weber (*Vājapeya*, p. 796 ff.)  
renders "Zeuger der Kraft." All the *pada*-mss. read in **c**  
*upá॰sthaḥ*, but SPP. strangely prefers to substitute *-sthe* on the  
authority of the comm. The comm. glosses *karāmahe* with *kurmahe*, but  
then explains it by *stumas;* the true text is perhaps *vácasā́ ”kar-*  
'would we gain' (Henry translates "puissions-nous la gagner"). TS. has  
**c** in iii. 3. 11⁴ **c**, and its *pada*-text reads *upá॰sthaḥ*. ⌊Ppp.  
has for **c** the **c** of VS. etc., and for **d** *sā no devī suhavā  
śarma yacchatu.*⌋
</details>

<details><summary>Griffith</summary>

id
7.6.2    We call for help the Queen of Law and Order, g...
7.6.2    We call for help the Queen of Law and Order, g...
Name: Comment, dtype: object
</details>
