+++
title = "०१ अथो यानि"

+++

<details><summary>Whitney</summary>

### Translation
1. Now then what things we note, or what things are within the box,  
those things we commit to thee.

### Notes
The first pāda here differs widely from the traditional text, which  
instead of *cáyāmahe* has *ca yásmā* (p. *yásmāi*) *āha*, or (a  
minority) *yásmāha;* the comm's text (according to SPP.) gives *ca yasmā  
ha*, but his explanation implies instead *yasmāi* (explained as =  
*yasya*); and SPP. accordingly reads in *saṁhitā*-text. *ca yásmā ha*,  
and in *pada*-text *ca: yásmāi: ha*, which is altogether to be  
condemned, since the two texts must correspond, and *yásmā* is also no  
word. SPP. in a note proposes further emendation of our *cáyāmahe* to  
*ca yā́mahe* (= *īmahe* or *yācāmahe*), which seems entirely  
unacceptable, as regards both form and sense. The whole verse is so  
obscure in meaning that we get little help from this element in  
reconstruction of the text; yet it is plain that we do not commit to  
another that which we do not possess, but are only wishing for. Ppp.  
also fails us; its reading of **a, b** is *atho yāni tamassahe yāni cā  
’ntaṣ pareṇihi*. The *yā́nivāntáḥ* of **b** is by the *pada*-mss.  
strangely resolved into *yā́n॰iva: antáḥ* (but one of SPP's has p.m.  
*yā́ni: vā: antáḥ*). It is also strange that SPP. emends to *cā ’ntáḥ*,  
on the sole authority of the comm., though as regards the sense there is  
nothing to choose between *ca* and *vā*. All the mss. accent *párīṇahi*  
(except our *pada*-mss., which have *pariṇáhi;* and one of SPP's has  
s.m. *pári: ṇahi*); but SPP. follows our emendation *parīṇáhi*. Nearly  
half the mss. have at the end *dadhmasi*, and Ppp. agrees with them. The  
comm. in his explanation connects the verse closely with 47. 9: there  
one's ⌊domestic⌋ animals were spoken of, here one's very numerous  
house-articles (*bahiṣṭhāni gṛhavartīni...vastūni*); and in two classes:  
those out in open sight (*anāvṛtadeśe*), and those inside an enclosed  
house or the like (*parito naddhe pariśrite gṛhādāu*).
</details>

<details><summary>Griffith</summary>

Then all that we accumulate, all that the treasure-chest contains,. All this do we entrust to thee.
</details>
