+++
title = "०२ विष्वञ्चस्तस्माद् यक्ष्मा"

+++

<details><summary>Whitney</summary>

### Translation
2. From him the *yákṣmas* scatter away, like antelopes from a wild  
beast. If, O *gúggulu*, thou art from the river, or if also from the  
ocean, the name of both have I taken (*grah*), that this man may be  
uninjured.

### Notes
There is discordance among the authorities as to the division and  
numbering of the verses of this hymn. The Anukr. makes three verses,  
reckoning the last two pādas as third verse, and SPP. follows it,  
although this division is wholly opposed to the sense, as breaking a  
sentence in two. The comm. reckons only the first of the three lines as  
vs. 2, noting that it may also be explained as belonging to vs. 1, being  
connected in sense with that; the other two lines he makes vs. 3. Our  
division followed the majority of our mss., with which agree the  
minority of SPP's. The choice between the three modes of division is  
difficult, and fortunately the matter is of no importance. ⌊Grill, p.  
193, suggests that 1 **a, b** is the foreign element, a prefixed  
fragment about *yakṣma*. That leaves 1 **c, d** and 2 **a, b** for our  
first vs., and 2 **c-f** for our second.⌋ The mss. ail read in **b**  
*mṛgā́ áśvā iva*,\* which is obviously wrong and unintelligible, though  
the comm., after his fashion, gives two equally worthless  
interpretations, once taking *áśvās* as an adjective (= *āśugāminas*) to  
*mṛgā́s*, and once supplying a second *iva:* "like deer \[or\] like  
horses." The translation follows our emendation, which is certainly  
plausible to an acceptable degree. Ppp. is corrupt: *yakṣmād mṛgāyaṣāya  
vedhase*. The *pada*-mss. blunderingly read *irate* at end of **a**;  
even SPP. allows himself to emend to *īrate*. In **c** he again gives  
*gulgulú* ⌊not *gugg-*⌋, with the majority of his mss.: our *guggulu* is  
in respect to accent ⌊as voc.⌋ an emendation (our mss. read *-lú* or  
*-ló*), but one called for by the following *ási;* ⌊this reason does not  
seem to me cogent: reading the nom. *-lú* (with SPP.: see introd.), we  
may render, 'whether thou art *guggulú* from the river or \[*guggulú*\]  
from the ocean'⌋. In **d**, the mss. give either *yádvāpyā́si* or  
*yádvā́pyā́si* (p. *yát: vā: ápi: ā॰ási*); SPP. accepts in his  
*saṁhitā*-text *vā́ ’py ā́si*, but in his *pada*-text changes *ā॰ási* to  
*ási*, thus making the two texts discordant; if he had courage for the  
latter alteration, he should also have had it for emending *ā́si* in  
*saṁhitā* to *ási*, as we had done, and as is plainly required. ⌊The  
text of the comm. has *’py asi*.⌋ \*⌊But W's P.M.W., *mṛgā́ṁ*.⌋
</details>

<details><summary>Griffith</summary>

Consumptions flee apart from it as from a wild beast fly the deer. If thou, O Bdellium, art produced from Sindhu or hast come from sea, The quality of both have I taken to keep this man unscathed.
</details>
