+++
title = "०५ यस्य क्रूरमभजन्त"

+++

<details><summary>Whitney</summary>

### Translation
5. Of whom the evil-doers shared ⌊*bhaj*⌋ the cruelty, the well-doers,  
by non-sleep, \[shared\] the pure (*púṇya*) life-time—thou revelest in  
the sky (*svàr*) with the highest relative; thou wast born out of the  
mind of one practising fervor.

### Notes
The translation is a merely literal rendering, and does not pretend to  
be an intelligent one. It implies in **a**, with SPP., a majority of his  
mss., and the comm., *ábhajanta* (the other readings are *apacanta,  
abhacanta, aṣacanta;* and there are varieties of accent); in **b**, all  
the *saṁhitā*-mss. combine *duṣhṛ́to sv-*, implying *asvápnena;* but  
⌊SPP's⌋ *pada*-mss. ⌊and W's *pada*-ms. D., p.m.⌋ read *svápnena;* ⌊W's  
D. seems to be corrected to *asváp-* and his L. also seems to have  
*asváp-*;⌋ SPP. accepts *asváp-*, with the comm. Ppp. gives no help; its  
text is *vy asya krūram abhijanta duṣkṛṇe sv-*; and *āpuḥ* for *āyuḥ* at  
the end of **b**. In **c**, *bandhúnā* (read by both editions, with the  
mss.) ought to have been emended ⌊cf. vs. 2 **a**⌋ to *bándhunā*, as  
both texts emend to *tapyá-* from *tápya-*, which appears in most of the  
mss. At the end, SPP. has the correct *jajñiṣe*, with about ⌊half of his  
authorities, including the carefully corrected Dc.⌋ (and with one of our  
later ones); our *jajñiṣé* represents the rest, but has no reason. Ppp.  
has in **c** *svarasajasi*. The comm. renders *abhajanta* by  
*prāpnuvanti*, and *asvapnena* by *duḥsvapnadarśanābhāvena;* he regards  
*duḥsvapna* as addressed in the second half-verse, and explains *svàr*  
as equivalent to a locative (as rendered above) ⌊cf. *Noun-Inflection*,  
p. 488⌋, and *bandhunā* (cf. 2 **a**) as *sṛṣṭeḥ prākkāle tvāṁ dṛṣṭavatā  
vidhātrā saha*.
</details>

<details><summary>Griffith</summary>

Thou whose severity hath reached ill-doers, and whose reward the good have gained in slumber, Delightest heaven with thy most lofty kinship, born from his spirit who was worn and weary.
</details>
