+++
title = "०६ उदिह्युदिहि सूर्य"

+++

<details><summary>Whitney</summary>

### Translation
6. Arise, arise, O sun; arise upon me with splendor; both let my hater  
be subject to me, and let not me be subject to my hater.—Thine, O  
Vishṇu, are heroisms manifold; do thou fill us with cattle of all forms;  
set me in comfort in the highest firmament (*vyòman*).

### Notes
Ppp. reads in the concluding pāda of the refrain *svadhāyāṁ no dh-*; the  
comm. also has *svadhāyām*. The mss. commit the absurdity throughout of  
setting no *avasāna* between the verse proper and the refrain; we have,  
as required by the sense, introduced it in our text; ⌊the matter is  
further discussed above, p. 805, ¶ 5⌋. The refrain is, as usual,  
represented in vss. 7-18 only by the word *táva* in the mss. (except in  
R., which fills it out a little further). ⌊With reference to the main  
stock of the verse, the comm. cites most appositely TB. iii. 7. 6²³, *úd  
agād ayám ādityó viśvena sáhasā sahá: dviṣántam máma randháyan mó aháṁ  
dviṣató radham*, although it does not appear why he did not cite rather  
our verse 24 **a-d**, below, which see.⌋ ⌊The refrain seems to count as  
11: 12 + 11 = 34 syllables with the Anukr.; but the true *triṣṭubh*  
cadences (*viśvárūpāiḥ, víoman*) of its second and third pādas suggest  
the suspicion of metrical disorder in the prior part of each of those  
pādas. One is tempted to think of *pṛṇīhi* as an ill-considered  
modernization of *pūrdhi;* and to wish that *mā* (before *dhehi*) might  
be excised, as superfluous in meter and in sense and as making a harsh  
change from plural (*nas*) to singular.—The change from singular to  
plural as between the main stock and the refrain, considering the  
looseness of their connection, is not to be called harsh.⌋
</details>

<details><summary>Griffith</summary>

Rise up, O Surya, rise thou up; with strength and splendour rise on me. Let him who hates me be my thrall; let me not be a thrall to him. Manifold are thy great deeds, thine, O Vishnu. Sate us with cattle of all forms and colours: set me in happiness, in loftiest heaven.
</details>
