+++
title = "०३ करम्भं कृत्वा"

+++

<details><summary>Whitney</summary>

### Translation
3. Having made gruel of sesame (?), teeming with fat, steaming (?), thou  
dost not rack, O ill-bodied one, him that has eaten thee merely from  
hunger.

### Notes
The verse is full of difficulties and doubtful points. The translation  
implies in **d** emendation of *jakṣivā́nt sá* to *jakṣivā́ṅsam*, as  
suggested by BR., s.v. *rup* (Grill rejects it, but unwisely); Ppp.  
reads *jakṣivīpyasya*. The construction of the augmentless aorist-form  
*rūrupas* with *ná* instead of *mā́* is against all rule and usage; the  
easiest emendation would be to *nā́ ’rūrupas;* Ppp. gives *nu rūrūpaḥ*.  
SPP. unaccountably reads *rūrupaḥ* in *pada*-text, both here and in 5  
**d** and 6 **d**, against all but one of his *pada*-mss. in this verse,  
and also against Prāt. iv. 86, which distinctly requires *rurupaḥ;* and  
(in all the three cases alike) the *pada*-mss. add after the word the  
sign which they are accustomed to use when a *pada*-reading is to be  
changed to something else in *saṁhitā*. In **c**, the *pada*-reading is  
*dustano íti duḥ॰tano;* the case is noted under Prāt. ii. 85. *Tiryàm*  
in **a** is rendered as if *tilyàm*, from *tila* (so the Pet. Lex.); the  
comm. derives it from *tiras*, and renders it *tirobhavam* 'vanishing,'  
which is as senseless as it is etymologically absurd; Ppp. reads instead  
*turīyam*. According to Rājan. xvi. 23, a sort of rice (as ripening in  
three months) is called *tiriya* (*tirima?*), but the word appears to be  
only a modern one, and is hardly to be looked for here. ⌊I cannot find  
it in the Poona ed.\*⌋ Grill makes the very unsatisfactory conjecture  
*atiriyam* "running over." In **b**, all our mss. (as also the comment  
on Prāt. ii. 62) read *pībasphākám* (p. *pībaḥ॰phākám*, which the  
comment just quoted ratifies), as our edition reads; SPP., on the other  
hand, prints *pībaspākám* (comm. *pīvaspākam*, explained as  
"fat-cooking") and declares this to be the unanimous reading of his  
authorities: this discordance of testimony is quite unexplainable. The  
translation implies emendation of the *pada*-reading to *pība॰sphākám*.  
Ppp. reads *udāhṛtam* for the problematic *udārathím;* but the latter is  
supported by RV. i. 187. 10 (of whose first two pādas, indeed, our **a,  
b** seem to be a reminiscence): *karambhá oṣadhe bhava pī́vo vṛkká  
udārathíḥ*. The comm. explains the word as *udriktārtijanakam* (Sāyaṇa  
to RV. entirely differently). ⌊in a supplementary note, Roth reports:  
Ppp. has *pivassākam;* R. has, p.m., *pibaspā-*, corrected to  
*pībasphā-;* T. has *pīvaspā-*.⌋ ⌊Correct the verse-number: for 6 read  
3.⌋ \*⌊Or is *nirapa*, at p. 220¹⁴, a variant of *tiriya?* The two are  
easily confused in *nāgarī*.⌋
</details>

<details><summary>Griffith</summary>

When he hath made of thee a cake, broad, steaming, swelling up with fat, And even in hunger eaten thee, then gripe him not, thou hideous one!
</details>
