+++
title = "०६ उप द्रव"

+++

<details><summary>Whitney</summary>

### Translation
6. Run up with milk, O cow-milker, quickly; pour in the milk of the  
ruddy \[cow\] in the *gharmá;* the desirable Savitar hath irradiated  
(*vi-khyā*) the firmament; after the forerunning of the dawn he shines  
forth (*vi-rāj*).

### Notes
SPP's text has *godhuk* (voc.) in **a**, but nearly half his authorities  
have *godhúk*, and so also nearly all ours (all those noted save Bp.),  
for which reason our text gives it; *godhuk* is doubtless the true  
reading, and it is followed in the translation. śśS. reads after it  
(perhaps by a misprint?) *oṣum;* AśS. (also probably by a misprint?)  
gives *payasā goṣam* (omitting *dhug o*). śśS. has *damūnās* for  
*vareṇyas* in **c**, and its **d** is *anu dyāvāpṛthivī supraṇīte*,  
while AśS. and Ppp. have nearly the same: *’nu dyāvāpṛthivī supraṇītiḥ*.  
This seems most likely to be the true ending of the verse; in our text  
has been somehow substituted a half-verse which is RV. v. 81. 2 **c,  
d**, and found also in several other texts: VS. xii. 3, TS. iv. 1. 10⁴,  
MS. ii. 7. 8; all of them accent *ánu* as an independent word, as our  
text doubtless ought to do (p. *anu॰prayā́nam*); one of SPP's  
authorities, and the comm., do so. The comm. does not recognize the  
adverb *oṣám*, but renders it by *taptam* ⌊*gharmam*, 'the heated  
*gharma*-vessel'⌋; he explains *vi akhyat* by *prakāśayati*. Two, if not  
three, of the pādas are *triṣṭubh*.
</details>

<details><summary>Griffith</summary>

Come hither, quickly come, thou milker of the kine; into the caldron pour milk of the radiant cow. Most precious Savitar hath looked upon the heaven. After Dawn's going-forth he sends his light abroad.
</details>
