+++
title = "१३ सूर्याया वहतुः"

+++

<details><summary>Whitney</summary>

### Translation
13. The bridal (*vahatú*) of Sūryā, which Savitar sent off (*ava-sṛj*),  
has gone forth; in the Maghās are slain the kine; in the Phalgunīs is  
the wedding.

### Notes
RV. (x. 85. 13) reads in **c** *aghā́su*\* ⌊Ppp. has the same⌋, and  
*hanyante* without the antithetical accent which all our mss. give, and  
which our text ought to read, and, for **d**, *árjunyoḥ páry uhyate*.  
The Maghā stars are what we call the Sickle, in the neck of Leo; the  
Phalgunī stars are the rectangle β, θ, δ 93 Leonis; arjunī = phalgunī;  
the moon is in the latter either one or two days after it is in the  
former.† From such utterly indefinite data the attempt to extract a date  
is wasted labor. 'Is the wedding': *vy ùhyate* is the verb corresponding  
to *vivāha* 'wedding,' lit. 'driving away'; Ppp. reads instead *vi  
havyate*. The second half-verse is quoted in Kāuś. 75. 5, in the general  
definition of the time for wedding. ⌊With reference to this  
much-discussed verse, see: Weber, in *Abh. der Berliner Ak.* for 1861  
(Nakṣatra-essay), p. 364, and in *Sb.* for 1894, p. 804; Jacobi,  
*Festgruss an Roth*, p. 69; Wint., p. 32.⌋  
  
\*⌊Weber discusses the readings *aghā́su* and *maghā́su*, and deems the  
RV. reading to be in this case the secondary one: *Sb.* 1894, p. 807.⌋  
†⌊Concerning these asterisms (no's 10, and 11, 12) see Whitney, JAOS.  
vi. 332-4, or *Oriental and Linguistic Studies*, ii. 352-3. It is not  
impertinent to note that the regents of the Phalgunīs are Bhaga and  
Aryaman, and that those of the Maghās are the Manes. For the latter, cf.  
TB. iii. 1. 4⁸: só ‘tra juhoti: pitṛ́bhyaḥ svā́hā, maghā́bhyaḥ svā́hā,  
’naghā́bhyaḥ svā́hā, gadā́bhyaḥ svā́hā, ’rundhatī́bhyaḥ svā́he, ’ti; but  
better TS. iv. 4. 10.⌋
</details>

<details><summary>Griffith</summary>

The bridal pomp of Surya, which Savitar started, moved along. In Magha days are oxen slain, in Phalgunis they wed the bride.
</details>
