+++
title = "४५ या अकृन्तन्नवयन्"

+++

<details><summary>Whitney</summary>

### Translation
45. They (f.) who spun, wove, and who stretched \[the web\], what  
divine ones (f.) gave the ends about, let them wrap thee in order to old  
age; \[as\] one long-lived put about thee this garment.

### Notes
Ppp. combines in **a** *yā ’kṛntan*. The verse is found also in PCS. (i.  
4. 13), HGS. (i. 4. 2), MB. (i. 1. 5). All end **a** with *yā atanvata;*  
in **b**, all insert *ca* after *yās;* and PGS. reads *tantūn abhito\*  
tatantha*, and MB. *devyo antān abhito tatantha;* for **c**, they have  
*tās tvā devīr* (MB. *devyo*) *jarasā* (PGS. *-se*) *saṁvyayantv* (PGS.  
*-yasva*); in **d**, only HGS. has *āyuṣmān*. ⌊Cf. MP. ii. 2. 5, and  
Wint., p. 47, and MGS. i. 10. 8 and p. 154.⌋ The verse has an extra  
syllable in **a** which the Anukr. does not notice. In Kāuś. 76. 4, this  
and vs. 53 accompany the putting of a hitherto unused garment upon the  
bride. ⌊The same two vss. are referred to by the name *paridhāpanīye* at  
79. 13: so the schol.⌋ \*⌊This sandhi is of course not to be laid at the  
door of the accurate Stenzler: it is doubtless the true reading of PGS.,  
and occurs (not only in MB., but also) in Bhavadeva's Paddhati, as  
Stenzler observes in his Transl., p. 12.⌋  
  
⌊The corruption of *abhito ‘dadanta* (so AV.) to *abhito tatantha* (PGS.  
MB. Bhavadeva) is of peculiar text-critical interest, not merely because  
it is a senseless and unintelligent perversion, but because it is  
revealed as a corruption by the ignorant failure of the persons  
responsible for it to change their sandhi in such a way (*abhitas  
tatantha*) as to fit their blunder.—This interest is heightened by the  
fact that we can see the probable occasion of the perversion, to wit,  
the occurrence in the preceding pāda of the words for 'spun,' 'wove,'  
'stretched web' (root *tan*). These technical terms of clothmaking lend  
a semblance of appropriateness to the introduction of *tantūn tan*  
'stretch the warp' in pāda **b**.—Roth had already booked *tatantha*  
among the cases of exchange between sonants and surds at ZDMG. xlviii.  
108.⌋
</details>

<details><summary>Griffith</summary>

They who have spun, and woven, and extended Goddesses who have drawn the ends together, May they invest thee for full long existence. Heiress of lengthen- ed life, endue this garment,
</details>
