+++
title = "०३ इन्द्रो जातो"

+++

<details><summary>Whitney</summary>

### Translation
3. Born an Indra among human beings (*manuṣyà*), he goes about (*car*)  
shining brightly, a heated hot-drink (*gharmá*); he, being one of good  
offspring, shall not go in mist (? *udārá*) who, understanding \[it\],  
shall not partake of (*aś*) the draft-ox.

### Notes
The verse is obscure, and the translation in various points very  
doubtful. The second pāda is apparently a beginning of the  
identification of the ox with the *gharma*, a sacrificial draught of  
heated milk, which we find further in vss. 5, 6; he is, since his kind  
yield warm milk, as it were an incorporation of that sacrifice. And the  
second half-verse is then a promise to whoever shall abstain from using  
the ox as food. Ppp. reads *eṣa* instead of *jātas* in **a**, and  
*saṁśiśānas* at end of **b**. In **c, d** the comm. reads *sam* for  
*san*, *ud āre* as two words, and *no ’ śnīyāt*, and of course makes  
very bad work of its explanation, finding metempsychosis in  
*sam...sarṣat* (*na saṁsarati punaḥ saṁsāradharmān na prāpnoti*).  
*Gharma* he takes first as "blazing sun," and then, alternatively, in  
its true sense. There is no other occurrence of an *s*-aorist from *sṛ*;  
and it is altogether against rule and usage to employ a subjunctive and  
an optative (*aśnīyāt*) in two coördinate clauses ⌊this seems to me to  
be a slip—see *Skt. Gram.* §575 b; and the clauses are hardly  
coördinate⌋; so that the reading is very suspicious. A few of our mss.  
(P.M.W.E.) read *ṇá* after *udāré*. ⌊Ludwig conjectures *suprayā́s* for  
*-jā́s*.⌋
</details>

<details><summary>Griffith</summary>

Being produced among mankind as Indra, the Caldron works heated and brightly glowing. Let him not, with good sons, pass off in vapour who hath not eaten of the Ox with knowledge.
</details>
