+++
title = "०७ इन्द्रो रूपेणाग्निर्वहेन"

+++

<details><summary>Whitney</summary>

### Translation
7. Indra by form, Agni by carrying (*váha*), Prajāpati, Parameshṭhin,  
Virāj; in Viśvānara he strode, in Vāiśvānara he strode, in the draft-ox  
he strode; he made firm, he sustained.

### Notes
This is the obscurest verse of this obscure hymn, and no attempt will be  
made to solve its riddles. Ppp. has a quite different text: *indro  
balenā ’sya parameṣṭhī vratenāi ’na gāus tena vāiśvadevāḥ: yo ‘smān  
dveṣṭi yaṁ ca vayaṁ dviṣmas tasya prāṇān asavahes tasya prāṇān vi  
varhah*. The two concluding clauses of our text most obviously belong  
with vs. 7 rather than vs. 8, and both editions so class them; but SPP.  
states that all his authorities reckon them to vs. 8, ending vs. 7 with  
the third *akramata* (which some of the mss., including our  
P.M.W.E.O.Op., mutilate to *akramat*). He adds that the Anukr. does the  
same; but this is evidently an oversight, our mss. of the Anukr. calling  
vs. 8 a simple *anuṣṭubh* (*madhyam etad anaḍuha iti pañcā ’nuṣṭubhaḥ*)  
and giving of vs. 7 a lengthy definition (see above), implying the  
division 9 + 10: 8 + 8 + 8: 12 = 55 (restoring both times the elided  
initial *a* in **f**); perhaps, then, SPP. is also mistaken in regard to  
the unanimity of his "mss. and Vāidikas"; at any rate, part of our mss.  
(Bp.I.H.Op.K.) divide with the editions. The comm., however, does not;  
as, indeed, he is repeatedly at discordance with the Anukr. on such  
points. He explains *váha* in **a** as "the part that carries (*vahati*)  
the yoke; the shoulder," and has nothing of any value to say as to the  
general sense of the verse. ⌊The identification of the draft-ox with  
Agni seems to rest on Agni's chief function of "carrying"; cf. RV. x.  
51. 5 **d**; 52. 1 **d**, 3 **d**, 4 **a**.⌋
</details>

<details><summary>Griffith</summary>

Prajapati, supreme and sovran ruler, Indra by form and by his shoulder Agni, Came to Visvanara, came to all men's Bullock: he firmly forti- fied and held securely.
</details>
