+++
title = "०१ अपमित्यमप्रतीत्तं यदस्मि"

+++

<details><summary>Whitney</summary>

### Translation
1. What I eat (?) that is borrowed, that is not given back; with what  
tribute of Yama I go about—now, O Agni, I become guiltless (*anṛṇá*) as  
to that; thou knowest how to unfasten all fetters.

### Notes
The translation implies emendation of *ásmi* to *ádmi* in **a**; this is  
suggested by *jaghasa* in vs. 2, and is adopted by Ludwig also; but  
possibly *apratīttam asmi* might be borne as a sort of careless vulgar  
expression for "I am guilty of non-payment." More or less of the verse  
is found in several other texts, with considerable variations of  
reading: thus TS. (iii. 3. 8¹⁻²), TA. (ii. 3. 1⁸), and MS. (iv. 14. 17)  
have pādas **a, b, c** (as **a, b, d** in TS.); in **a**, all with *yát  
kúsīdam* for *apamítyam* and without *asmi*, and TA.MS. with  
*ápratītam*, and TS. ending with *máyi* (for *yát*), and TA.MS. with  
*máye ’há;* in **b**, all put *yéna* before *yamásya*, and TA.MS. have  
*nidhínā* for *balínā*, while MS. ends with *cárāvas;* in **c** (**d**  
in TS.), all read *etát* for *idám*, and MS. accents *ánṛṇas* (**c** in  
TS. is *ihāt ’vá sán nirávadaye tát:* cf. our 2 **a**); **d** in TA. is  
*jī́vann evá práti tát te dadhāmi*, with which MS. nearly agrees, but is  
corrupt at the end: *j.e.p. hastā́nṛṇāni*. TB. (iii. 7. 9⁸) corresponds  
only in the first half-verse (with it precisely agrees ĀpśS. in xiii.  
22, 5): thus, *yā́ny apāmítyāny ápratīttāny ásmi yamásya balínā cárāmi;*  
its other half-verse corresponds with our 2 **a, b**. MB. (ii. 3. 20)  
has *yat kusīdam apradattam maye ’ha yena yamasya nidhinā carāṇi: idaṁ  
tad agne anṛṇo bhavāmi jīvann eva pratidatte dadāni*. ⌊This suggests  
*bhavāni* as an improvement in our **c**.⌋ Finally GB. (ii. 4. 8) quotes  
the *pratīka* in this form: *yat kusīdam apamityam apratītam*. Ppp.  
reads for **a, b** *apamṛtyum apratītaṁ yad asininnasyena*, etc., and,  
for **d**, *jīvanna ena prati dadāmi sarvam* (nearly as TA. **d**,  
above). The comm. takes *balinā* as = *balavatā*.
</details>

<details><summary>Griffith</summary>

That which I eat, a debt which still is owing, the tribute due to Yama, which supports me, Thereby may I be free from debt, O Agni. Thou knowest how to rend all bonds asunder.
</details>
