+++
title = "०४ इमामग्ने शरणिम्"

+++

<details><summary>Whitney</summary>

### Translation
4. This offense (? *śaráṇi*) of ours mayest thou, O Agni, bear with  
(*mṛṣ*), what distant road we have gone. Successful (*śuná*) for us be  
bargain and sale; let return-dealing make me fruitful; do ye two enjoy  
this oblation in concord; successful for us be our going about and  
rising.

### Notes
The first two pādas are wanting in the Pāipp. version of the hymn  
(though they occur, in another connection, in Ppp. i.), and they are  
plainly an intrusion here, due to the mention of distant travel in  
**b**; they form the first half of RV. i. 31. 16 (but RV. reads for  
**b** *imám ádhvānaṁ yám ágāma dūrā́t;* LśS., in its repetition of the  
RV. verse at iii. 2. 7, agrees with AV. in preferring *dūram*). The  
insertion dislocates the comm's division of the hymn; he reckons only  
the first 4 pādas as vs. 4, then the last two with the first two of our  
5 as vs. 5, and the latter half of our 5 with the former half of our 6  
as vs. 6, making a vs. 7 of only the two concluding pādas of our 6, and  
numbering the two remaining verses as 8 and 9. Some of our mss.  
(P.M.W.E.I.) divide and number in the same way to the middle of our vs.  
6, then making vs. 7 consist of 6 pādas and end where our vs. 7 ends.  
Ppp. has for its verse a different version of our **c-f**: *paṇo* for  
*śunam* at the beginning (with *‘stu* after *no*), *godhani naṣ* for  
*phalinam mā*, and, for our **e**, *saṁrarāṇā havir idaṁ juṣantām.* The  
Anukr. seems to scan the verse as 11 + 9: 12 + 11: 11 + 12 = 66, though  
**c** and **f** are properly to be made regularly *triṣṭubh* by elision  
to *‘stu*. The comm. renders *śaráṇi* in **a** by "injury" (*hiṅsā*),  
and explains it as either that arising (to Agni) from the intermission  
of sacred rites in consequence of the householder's absence from home,  
or else that to the absentee from his long journey as expressed in  
**b**—*mīmṛṣas* being in the first case = *kṣamasva*, and in the second  
= *marṣaya* or *titikṣaya* 'cause us to endure': perhaps the second is,  
after all, the better. ⌊For **d**, rather, 'may barter make me abounding  
in fruit,' i.e. 'may barter bring me its reward.'⌋
</details>

<details><summary>Griffith</summary>

Pardon this stubbornness of ours. O Agni, the distant pathway which our feet have trodden. Propitious unto us be sale and barter, may interchange of mer- chandise enrich me. Accept, ye twain, accordant, this libation! Prosperous be our ventures and incomings.
</details>
