+++
title = "०२ सं चेन्नयाथो"

+++

<details><summary>Whitney</summary>

### Translation
2. May ye, O Aśvins, both lead together and bring \[her\] together with  
him who loves her. The fortunes (*bhága*) of you (two) have come  
together, together \[your\] intents, together \[your\] courses  
(*vratá*).

### Notes
Notwithstanding the accent of *vákṣathas*, it does not seem possible to  
understand *céd* in **a** as 'if' (Grill, however, so takes it; Weber as  
above), since the second halfverse has no application to the Aśvins (we  
should like to alter *vām* in **c** to *nāu*). ⌊But see Bloomfield.⌋ The  
translators take *kāmínā* in **a** as for *kāmínāu* 'the (two) lovers,'  
which it might also well be; the comm. says *kāminā mayā.* He also calls  
*vrata* simply a *karmanāman*, which is very near the truth, as the word  
certainly comes from root *vṛt* (see JAOS. xi., p. ccxxix = PAOS. Oct.  
1884). Ppp. reads *neṣitas* in **b** for *vakṣathas;* and, in **c, d**,  
*sarvā ’n̄ganāsy agmata saṁ cakṣūṅṣi sam* etc. Both here and in vs. 5  
*bhága* might possibly have its other sense of genitalia, or imply that  
by double meaning; but the comm., who would be likely to spy out any  
such hidden sense, says simply *bhāgyāni*. ⌊In **a**, *aśvinā* is  
misprinted.—W's implications are that if *vakṣathas* were toneless it  
might be taken as a case of antithetical construction and that there  
would be no need to join it with *céd.*⌋
</details>

<details><summary>Griffith</summary>

Ye, Asvins, lead together, ye unite and bring the loving pair. Now have the fortunes of you twain, now have your vows and spirits met.
</details>
