+++
title = "०५ अपपापं परिक्षवम्"

+++

<details><summary>Whitney</summary>

### Translation
5. \[Drive\] away evil sneezing about; may we enjoy (*bhaj*) propitious  
(*púṇya*) sneezing; let the evil-nosed jackal and *púṇyaga* urinate upon  
\[it\] for thee.

### Notes
Part of the mss. read in **a, b** *parichavam* and *chavam:* \[see  
note\* to vs. 4⌋. All the mss., and so SPP., have at the beginning  
*apapāpám;* the comm., with us, *ápa pāpám*. Again, all the mss. and  
SPP. accent *bhakṣīmáhi*. Ppp. reads *āpa māpa parikṣapaṁ puṇyam  
bhakṣīmahi kṣapam*, which gives no help. For **c, d**, SPP. reads *śivā́  
te pāpa nā́sikām puṇyagaś cā ’bhí mehatām* (the *pada* being *púṇya॰gaḥ:  
ca: abhí: me: hatām*); the comm., *śivā te pāpanāśikā paṇḍakaś cā ’bhi  
medhatām*. The comm. explains *śivā* as a name for jackal (so adopted in  
the translation above); *pāpanāśikā* is, of course, destroying evil;  
*abhi medhatām* = *protsāhayatu:* the general sense being that, whereas  
the sight or hearing of a jackal, or the sight of a eunuch, is a bad  
omen, they are in virtue of the spell of this verse to have a totally  
opposite influence. How SPP. would render his text ⌊of **a**, in  
particular?⌋ it is impossible to see. The version given here lays no  
claim to being of any value. Ppp. reads *śivā te pāpanāśakā* (in this  
word favoring the comm.) *ṣaṇṇagasyā ’bhimehataḥ*, which does not seem  
to help us. The reading of the line in our edition is not to be praised.
</details>

<details><summary>Griffith</summary>

May we escape an evil sneeze, enjoy the sneeze of happy luck, And may our nostrils smelling what is pleasant pour forth fragrant scent.
</details>
