+++
title = "०२ यज्ञपतिमृषयः एनसाहुर्निर्भक्तम्"

+++

<details><summary>Whitney</summary>

### Translation
2. The seers declare the master (*-páti*) of the sacrifice by reason of  
sin disportioned, distressed about \[his\] offspring. What honeyed drops  
he offended in (? *apa-rādh*), with them let Viśvakarman unite  
(*sam-sṛj*) us.

### Notes
  
  
  
  
  
MS. has in **a** the equivalent *yájamānam;* its **b** reads *vihā́ya  
prajā́m anutápyamānāḥ;* while TS. has *prajā́*(*ḥ*) *nírbhaktā*(*ḥ*)  
*anutapyámānāḥ*, and Ppp. *nirbhāgatā bhāgād anutapyamānā.* TS. and MS.  
make the lost drops only two: *madhavyāù stokāú...tā́bhyām*, with *tāú*  
instead of *yā́n*, and hence *rarādha*. The translation implies  
correction to *madhavy-*, as read by both the parallel texts and the  
comm.; SPP's text agrees with ours in reading the *mathavy-* of all the  
mss. (except three of SPP's, which follow the comm.). All the  
*saṁhitā*-mss. make the absurd combination *naṣ ṭébhiḥ* in **d**,  
seeming to have in mind the participle *naṣṭá;* SPP. retains *naṣṭébhis*  
in his text, while ours emends to *nas tébhis*, as given in the comment  
to Prāt. ii. 31. Ppp. has our second half-verse as its 3 **c, d**; it  
reads *madhavyāṅ stokān upa yā rarādha saṁ mā tarāis sṛjad viśvakarmā.*  
The comm. takes *anu* and *tapy-* in **b** as two independent words; he  
explains *apa rarādha* in **c** by *antaritān kṛtavān*, which is  
doubtless its virtual meaning. ⌊W's prior draft reads: "what honeyed  
drops he failed of"—that is, 'missed.'⌋
</details>

<details><summary>Griffith</summary>

Rishis have called the sacrifice's patron amerced through sin, sorrowing for his offspring. Those drops of meath whereof the missed enjoyment,--may Visvakarman with those drops unite us.
</details>
