+++
title = "१२ ग्रामणीरसि ग्रामणीरुत्थायाभिषिक्तोऽभि"

+++

<details><summary>Whitney</summary>

### Translation
12. Troop-leader art thou, arising a troop-leader; being anointed  
(*abhisic*), do thou anoint me with splendor; brilliancy art thou,  
brilliancy maintain thou upon me; wealth art thou, wealth assign thou to  
me.

### Notes
The reading of **a** is probably corrupt; for *utthā́ya*, which both  
editions give (with two or three mss.), the mss. in general have  
*ukthyāya* or *utthyāya* or *ucchyāya*, with *ā̀* or *ā́*. According to  
SPP., the comm's text has *grāmaṇī chāyā*, and Ppp. strangely gives the  
same; what he attempts to explain is very doubtful: *ato ‘smākam api  
grāmaṇīr bhava...atha vā mām api śreṣṭhaṁ kuru*. SPP. divides  
*grāma॰nī́ḥ* in his *pada*-text, but without authority from the mss., and  
against his practice in iii. 5. 7. In **b**, some of the mss. read  
*ṣiñca*. On the ground of meter, SPP. suggests that *rayís* in **d** may  
be for *ádhirayis*, one of the two successive *adhi*'s being lost; this  
would be more acceptable if the word *adhirayi*, or anything closely  
analogous with it, anywhere occurred. The comm. makes an *adhirayis*  
(explaining it as *adhigatarayis* or *prāptadhanas*) by stealing for it  
the *ádhi* of **c**, with his usual disregard of *pada*-division and  
accent (neither of which, to be sure, is of much account in this book).  
⌊The *Index* calls this vs. prose; but with *ádhi* at the end of **c**  
and *ádhirayis* in **d** it might scan as 11 + 12: 11 + 11.⌋
</details>

<details><summary>Griffith</summary>

Vigour art thou, in me do thou plant vigour: riches art thou, so do thou grant me riches. Plenty art thou, so prosper me with plenty: House-holder, hear" a householder's petition.
</details>
