+++
title = "०३ दूराच्चकमानाय प्रतिपाणायाक्षये"

+++

<details><summary>Whitney</summary>

### Translation
3. To him that desired from afar, that trembled on at the  
inexhaustible—the places (*ā́śā*) listen to him; by desire they generated  
heaven.

### Notes
It is of no consequence how this verse, especially the first half, is  
rendered; it is nothing but corrupt nonsense. The degree of its  
corruption may be seen by comparing it with the corresponding verse in  
TA. iii. 15. 1: *sadyáś cakamānā́ya pravepanā́ya* ⌊Poona ed., *-vepān-*⌋  
*mṛtyáve: prā́ ’smā ā́śā aśṛṇvan kā́menā ’janayan púnaḥ;* neither version  
is translatable. The majority of authorities read in **b**  
*pravipāṇā́yākṣayé* ⌊or *-ā́kṣaye*⌋ (the *pada*-readings are, for the  
first part, *pravi॰pānā́ya*, and, for the second, *ā॰kṣayé* or *ā́॰kṣaye*  
or *ā॰kṣaye*); but some have *pratipāṇā́ya* ⌊the lingual *ṇ* of which  
seems to betray the *ti* as a corruption for *vi*⌋ and *prāripāṇā́ya*.  
The comm. understands *pratipāṇāya* and *akṣaye*, and SPP. follows him,  
accenting *pratipāṇā́ya* and *ákṣaye*, and reading in *pada*-text  
*prati॰pāṇā́ya* (as if that would or could become in *saṁhitā*-text  
*-pāṇ-*!); with his usual carelessness, the comm. takes *-pāṇāya*, in  
spite of its *ṇ*, from root *pā* (= *sarvatorakṣanāyā  
’bhimataphalaprāpaṇāya:* the latter equivalent looks as if he also saw  
something of *pra-āp* in it!). Ppp. has in **b** *pratipāṇāyākṣe*, in  
**c** *āsmā ’śṛṇvann*, and in **d** *-janayat saha*. The translation  
implies in **b** *pravipāṇā́yā́ ’kṣaye*. The Anukr. apparently scans the  
verse as 7 + 7: 7 + 7 = 28.
</details>

<details><summary>Griffith</summary>

They heard his prayers, and they begot, by Kama, heavenly- light for him. Who from a distance longed for it, a dealer ready to exchange.
</details>
