+++
title = "०२ युनक्त सीरा"

+++

<details><summary>Whitney</summary>

### Translation
2. Harness ye the plows, extend the yokes; scatter (*vap*) the seed here  
in the prepared womb; may the bunch (?) of *virā́j* be burdened for us;  
may the sickles draw in (*ā-yu*) the ripe \[grain\] yet closer.

### Notes
In the first half-verse, RV. (ib. 3) and VS. (ib. 68) have *tanudhvam*  
for *tanota*, the rest (ibid.) agreeing with our text (but K. has *kṛto  
yonir*); Ppp. reads *kṣetre* instead of *yonāu; yónāu*, of course,  
involves a hidden comparison of sowing with impregnation. In the  
difficult and obscure second half, the other texts (not Ppp.) give *girā́  
ca* for the unintelligible *virā́jas*, and *ásat* (with accent apparently  
meant as antithetic) for *asat*, which is read in all the mss., but in  
our edition (not in SPP's) emended to *ásat;* the same texts accent  
*śruṣṭís* (and our edition was emended to agree with them; SPP. accents  
the first syllable, with all the mss.). SPP. reads *śnúṣṭs*, with the  
majority of his authorities (including oral reciters), and with the  
comm.; among his mss. are found also *śrúṣṭis*, *ślú-*, *srú-*, *snú-*,  
and *śnúṣṭīs*. Part of our mss. also (E.I.H.Op.) are noted as seeming to  
intend *śnú-*, and, as Ppp. supports it by reading *suniṣṭis sabh-*, the  
reading *śnúṣṭiḥ* is adopted in the translation ⌊as also at viii. 2. 1⌋.  
The manuscripts are not at all to be relied on for distinguishing *śnu*  
and *śru* ⌊cf. iii. 30. 7 and note⌋. The comm. explains it by  
*āśuprāpakaḥ stambaḥ*, and *sábharās* as *phalabhārasahitas* 'heavy with  
fruit'; of *virā́j* he makes easy work by identifying it with *anna*, on  
the authority of TB. iii. 8. 10⁴: *ánnaṁ vāí virā́ṭ!* In **d**, finally,  
the chief discordance of the versions is at the end, where, for *ā́  
yavan* (Ppp. *āyuvaṁ*), RV.VS.Kap. read *é ’yāt*, and TS.MS.K. *ā ’yāt*.  
But TS. has *sṛṇyā̀* (instead of *-yàs*), and some of our mss. (P.M.W.),  
with the majority of SPP's, combine *íchṛṇyàs* or *icchṛṇyàs*, implying  
*śṛṇyàs*. The Anukr. does not heed that pāda **d** is, as it stands,  
*jagatī*. ⌊W., in his own copy and in *Index*, seems to approve the  
accentless *asat*.—Comm. has *ā yavam* in **d**.⌋
</details>

<details><summary>Griffith</summary>

Lay on the yokes and fasten well the traces: formed is the furrow, sow the seed within it. Viraj vouchsafe us hearing fraught with plenty! Let the ripe grain come near and near the sickle.
</details>
