+++
title = "०३ लाङ्गलं पवीरवत्"

+++

<details><summary>Whitney</summary>

### Translation
3. Let the plow (*lā́n̄gala*), lance-pointed, well-lying, with  
well-smoothed handle, turn up (*ud-vap*) cow, sheep, an on-going  
chariot-frame, and a plump wench.

### Notes
  
  
  
  
  
That is, apparently, let all these good things come as the reward of  
successful agriculture. The verse, not found in RV., but occurring in  
VS. (ib. 71; and thence quoted in the Vasiṣṭha Dharmasūtra ii. 34 and  
explained in ii. 35), as well as in TS.MS.K. (as above), has many  
difficult and questionable points. For *pavīrávat* (Ppp. puts it before  
*lān̄galam*) VS. accents *pávīravat*, and TS.MS.K. substitute  
*pávīravam;* for *suśīmam* all have *suśevam* 'very propitious'; the  
Pet. Lex. suggests *susīmam* 'having a good parting' i.e. of furrows, or  
'even-furrowed'; and R. refers to MB. i. 5. 2, *sīmānaṁ nayāmi.* Ppp.  
reads *suveśam*, which probably means *suśevam*. The impracticable  
*somasat-saru* (so in *pada*-text) is *somapít-saru* in VS., MS., K.,  
and Vasiṣṭha, and *soma-pitsalaṁ* in Ppp.; Vas. renders it "provided  
with a handle for the drinker of soma," implying the division  
*somapi-tsaru;* Weber conjectures a noun *uman* 'strap,' and emends to  
*soma* (= *sa-uma*) *satsaru*, "with strap and handle." But TS. reads  
*sumatí॰tsaru*, and this is adopted in the translation, *mati* being  
taken not as from *man* but as the word found in *matīkṛ* and its  
derivatives, and related with *matya* etc. (Weber also refers to this  
meaning and connection.) The comm. explains *suśīmam* by *karṣakasya  
sukhakaram*, without telling how he arrives at such a sense; and  
*somasatsaru* (disregarding the *pada*-division) as from *tsaru*, either  
"a concealed going in the ground" (root *tsar*, explained by  
*chadmagatāu*), or else "a kind of part to be held by the plowman's  
hand"; in either case "a producer of the soma-sacrifice" (i.e.  
*soma-sa*). For *ratha-vahā́na* 'the frame that carries a chariot when  
not in use,' and *prasthā́vat*, here virtually 'with the chariot on it,'  
see R. in the *Festgruss an Böhtlingk*, p. 95 ff.; the comm. interprets  
as *aśvabalīvardādikaṁ rathavāhanasamartham*. VS. reads at the beginning  
of **c** *tád úd vapati*, and TS. *úd ít kṛṣati;* Ppp. has *dadata  
kṛṣata;* VS.TS.MS.Ppp. give for **e** *prapharvyàṁ* (Ppp. *-yāṁ*) *ca  
pī́varīm* ⌊and VS.TS. invert the order of **d** and **e**⌋; the comm.  
also has *pīvarīm* (= *sthūlām*); *prapharvī* he explains as  
*prathamavayāḥ kanyā.* The first pāda is defective unless we resolve  
*la-ān̄-*. ⌊Zimmer, p. 236, refers to Sir H. M. Elliot's *Memoirs*, ii.  
341, for a description of the Penjab plow.⌋
</details>

<details><summary>Griffith</summary>

The keen-shared plough that bringeth bliss, furnished with traces and with stilts, Shear out for me a cow, a sheep, a rapid drawer of the car, a blooming woman, plump and strong!
</details>
