+++
title = "०६ इन्द्रेन्द्र मनुष्याः३"

+++

<details><summary>Whitney</summary>

### Translation
6. Like a human Indra, go thou away; for thou hast concurred (*sam-jñā*)  
in concord with the castes (?); he here hath called thee in his own  
station; he shall sacrifice to the gods, and he shall arrange the people  
(*víśas*).

### Notes
The translation of this obscure and difficult verse implies much and  
venturesome emendation in the first half: namely, in **a**, *índra iva  
manuṣyàḥ*, and in **b** *várṇāis*. Weber also takes *manuṣyā̀s* as meant  
for a nom. sing., and renders it "menschengestaltet"; the other  
translators understand *manusyā̀ víśas*, as does the Pet. Lex. The Ppp.  
version, *indro idam manuṣya pre ’hi*, suggests *-ṣyaḥ*, and is  
decidedly better in *prehi* (to be resolved into *pṛ-e-hi*, whence  
perhaps the corruption to *parehi*); the repeated vocative *índra॰indra*  
(so the *pada*-text) is not to be tolerated. For **b**, Ppp. has *saṁ hi  
yajñiyās tvā varuṇena saṁvidānaḥ*, which is too corrupt to give us aid;  
the emendation to *várṇāis* is a desperate and purely tentative one, as  
there is no evidence that *várṇa* had assumed so early the sense of  
'caste.' Weber suggests that *varuṇa* here is equal to *varaṇa*  
'elector'; Zimmer takes it as virtually for *devāis:* both entirely  
unsatisfactory. Ppp. ends the verse with *so kalpayād diśah.* To the  
comm. there is no difficulty; the repeated vocative is out of reverence  
(*ādarārtham*); *manuṣyās* is a Vedic irregularity for *-ṣyān*, or else  
qualifies *prajās* understood; the plural *varuṇāis* is plur.  
*majestaticus* for *varuṇena;* *kalpayāt*, finally, is *svasvavyāpāreṣu  
niyun̄ktām*. The Anukr. passes without notice the *jagatī* pāda **d**, it  
being easy to read the verse into 44 syllables.
</details>

<details><summary>Griffith</summary>

Pass to the tribes of men. O Indra, Indra. Thou the Varunas hast been found accordant. To his own place this one hath called thee, saying, Let him adore the Gods and guide the clansmen.
</details>
