+++
title = "०२ मेष इव"

+++

<details><summary>Whitney</summary>

### Translation
2. Like a ram, thou art bent both together and wide apart, when in the  
upper wood \[the upper\] and the lower stone devour; exciting (*ard*)  
head with head, breast (*ápsas*) with breast, he gnaws the soma-stalks  
(*aṅśu*) with green mouths.

### Notes
In **a**, 'ram' (*meṣá*) perhaps means something made of ram's wool or  
skin; or the action of the stones is compared to that of a ram, butting  
and drawing back. K. (of which I happen to have the readings in this  
verse) gives *meṣa iva yad upa ca vi ca carvati*, and Āp. the same,  
except the blundering *carvari* for *carvati*. The comm. has *ucyase*  
for *acyase*. Ppp's **a** is *tveṣāi ’va siñca itaror varṇyate*. In  
**b**, which is the most hopeless part of the verse, K. reads *yad  
apsaradrūr uparasya khādati*, and Āp. doubtless intends the same, but is  
corrupted in part to *apsararūparasya*. The comm. has *aparas* for  
*uparas*. In **c**, K. has *vakṣasā vakṣa ejayann*, Āp. the same, and  
also, blunderingly, *girāu* for *śiro*. Ppp. has *apsarā ’pso*. In  
**d**, K. begins with *aṅśum;* Āp. has the same and also *gabhasti;* the  
comm. again *bibhasti*. The comm. has two different conjectures, both  
worthless, for *uttaradrāu*. ⌊Pischel discusses *ápsas*, *Ved. Stud.* i.  
308 ff., and this vs. at p. 312. Aufrecht discusses the roots *bhas*,  
KZ. xxxiv. 458. Hillebrandt discusses this vs., *Ved. Mythol.* i. 154.⌋
</details>

<details><summary>Griffith</summary>

Thou like a fleece contractest and expandest thee what time the upper stone and that below devour. Closely compressing head with head and breast with breast he crunches up the tendrils with his yellow jaws.
</details>
