+++
title = "०६ ध्रुव आ"

+++

<details><summary>Whitney</summary>

### Translation
6. O ladle, ascend the all-nourishing earth; stride, O offering spoon,  
unto the atmosphere; O sacrificial spoon, go to the sky (*dív*) in  
company with the sacrificer; with the little spoon (*sruvá*) \[as\]  
calf, milk thou all the teeming, unirritated quarters.

### Notes
The mss. in general strangely accent the two vocatives in **a** and  
**b** on the final syllable; all ours (save Op.s.m.), and all but one or  
two of SPP's, have *dhruvé* (*-vá* in *saṁhitā*); all ours (save Op.),  
and nearly all SPP's, have *upabhṛ́t;* all ours ⌊save Bs.⌋ and most of  
SPP's, however, accent *júhu* correctly in **c** (but P.I. have *jū́hū*,  
and M. has *júhū*); both editions make the necessary corrections. At the  
end, SPP. gives in his text *áhṛṇīyamānaḥ*, with the great majority of  
his authorities, and with the comm.\* Of our mss., only  
O.s.m.Op.D.R.p.m. give *-naḥ*, while O.p.m.R.s.m. have *-nāḥ;* the  
reading *-nāḥ* is, in my opinion, decidedly the preferable one; it is  
the quarters that kindly make no resistance to being milked. According  
to the comm., the *adhvaryu*, at time of sacrifice, holds the *upabhṛt*  
in his left hand, and makes oblation with the *juhū* in his right. The  
verse (13 + 11: 12 + 11 + 9 = 56) counts as the Anukr. describes it. Its  
ritual use was given under the preceding verse. \*⌊The comm. assumes a  
very harsh change to the direct address and applies *ahṛṇ-* to the  
sacrificer: *atha pratyakṣavad uktiḥ: evaṁ srugbhir lokatrayam prāpito  
yajamānas tvam ahṛṇīyamānaḥ*.⌋
</details>

<details><summary>Griffith</summary>

Dhruva, ascend thou earth the all sustainer: go thou, O Upa- bhrit, to air's mid-region. Juhu, go skyward with the sacrificer; go, and with Sruva be thy calf beside thee drain all the swelling unreluctant quarters.
</details>
