+++
title = "१२ शमग्नयः समिद्धा"

+++

<details><summary>Whitney</summary>

### Translation
12. Let the fires, kindled, take hold happily; let the Jātavedases,  
making done (*śṛtá*) here him that is Prajāpati's \[and\] sacrificial,  
not throw him down.

### Notes
The verse (11 + 12: 12) lacks a syllable of counting as a full *bṛhatī*.  
Two of our mss. (O.R.) read in **b** *jātavedaḥ* (without accent). The  
comm. reads *sam* instead of *śam* at the beginning. ⌊Cf. vs. 13.⌋  
  
⌊The verse reminds us strongly of 2. 4 (which see), where *cikṣipas*  
without *ava* has quite a different meaning. Here, *cikṣipan* with *ava*  
means 'let them \[the fires, not\] throw \[any part of the dead man\]  
down'; that is, Agni (in his kindly forms, *śivā́s tanvàs*) is to treat  
the dead man kindly and not let a foot, the head, or a hand fall off  
from the funeral pile, but is to consume him completely: cf. the comm.,  
who aptly says, *yathā niravaśeṣaṁ dahyate tathā*. The importance, in  
Hindu belief, of having every member of the body carried by Agni to the  
other world for use in the next life is abundantly shown by the hymns:  
see especially AV. xviii. 3. 9 ab; 2. 24 c; 4. 64; iv. 34. 2: and  
Whitney, *Oriental and Linguistic Studies*, i. 56-57.—When, as often  
happens, the pile of wood is too short for the corpse, the feet will  
naturally overhang and drop off from the pyre. In my journal of a visit  
at Benares, under date of Feb. 25, 1889, I find the following: "Saw a  
cremation, at the Burning Ghat. One foot of the corpse fell off the pyre  
(which was none too long), and a man tried to put it back on the fire  
with a bamboo. But failing, he took it by the toe with thumb and fingers  
and chucked it back." An allusion to an occurrence of this kind is  
clearly made by the Chāndogya Upanishad at vii. 15. 3: *atha yady apy  
enān utkrāntaprāṇāñ cchūlena* \[cf. the bamboo, above\] *samāsaṁ  
vyatisaṁdahet: nāi ’vāi ’nam brūyuḥ pitṛha ’sī ’ti* etc.⌋
</details>

<details><summary>Griffith</summary>

Happily lit, let fires, each Jatavedas, seize on Prajapati's appoint- ed victim. Let them not cast it down while here they cook it.
</details>
