+++
title = "२८ द्रप्सश्चस्कन्द पृथिवीमनु"

+++

<details><summary>Whitney</summary>

### Translation
28. The drop leaped (*skand*) toward the earth, the sky (*dív*), toward  
both this lair (*yóni*) and the one that was of old; of the drop that  
goes about toward the same lair do I make oblation, after seven  
invocations (*hótrā*).

### Notes
The verse is RV. x. 17. 11, and found also in several other texts: VS.  
(xiii. 5), TS. (iv. 2. 8², 9⁵), TA. (vi. 6. 1), MS. (ii. 5. 10), śB.  
(vii. 4. 1²⁰). RV. differs from our text by reading in **a** *prathamā́ṅ  
ánu dyū́n;* all the rest agree throughout with AV., save that TS.TA. have  
*tṛtī́yam* for *samānám* in **c**. ⌊In MS. this verse stands between our  
ix. 4. 5 and 4. 4, as already noted under ix. 4. 5.⌋ Kāuś. does not  
apply the verse, but it is found (as above) in the funeral ceremony of  
TA., next after our 4. 35 below, being addressed to any overflow of the  
offered dish of curds and honey. The comm. explains *drapsa* by  
*somarasasthitodakakaṇa*, and teaches that such a drop, or the soma  
itself, is here praised, in view of the enjoyment of the fruit of their  
soma-sacrifices by the Fathers in heaven; it also points out that in CB.  
(vii. 4. 1²⁰) this drop is praised as the sun (*āditya*). In Vāit. (16.  
17) the verse (with RV. x. 17. 12, 13 and one or two others) is used in  
the *agniṣṭoma* ceremony, with offerings to the soma-drops (*vāipruṣa*),  
on occasion of the overflow of soma.
</details>

<details><summary>Griffith</summary>

On all the earth, to heaven, the drop descended, on this place and on that which was before it. I offer up, throughout the seven oblations, the drop which still to one same place is moving.
</details>
