+++
title = "३५ वैश्वानरे हविरिदम्"

+++

<details><summary>Whitney</summary>

### Translation
35. In Vāiśvānara I offer this oblation, a thousand-fold,  
hundred-streamed fountain (*útsa*); it supports (*bhṛ*) \[our\] father,  
grandfathers; \[our\] great-grandfathers it supports, swelling.

### Notes
That is, with fatness or abundance (*pinv*). The verse is found also at  
the beginning of TA. vi. 6; but this rectifies the meter of **b** by  
reading *sāhasrám útsaṁ śatádhāram etám;* and its **c, d** are not less  
different: *tásminn eṣá pitáram pitámahám prápitāmaham bibharat  
pínvamāne*. One of our mss. (Op.) also accents *prápitāmahān*. In TA.  
(as noticed above) the verse is next followed by our 4. 28, in the  
relic-interment ceremony; according to Kāuś. (82. 22), it is used on the  
second day after cremation, with an oblation on the back of a  
vānyavatsā\* cow, after causing her to be milked on the site of the  
funeral pile. The comm. ⌊p. 209¹⁸⌋ calls the cow *anyavatsā* (only by an  
error of the editor?). ⌊If error, it is an easy one, for the comm's  
words as combined are *dahanasthānasaṁnidhāv anyavatsāyāḥ:* but  
*anyavatsā* occurs in the comm. to AB. vii. 2, mentioned below.⌋ The  
verse (11 + 9: 11 + 12 = 43) is hardly fit to be reckoned a *triṣṭubh*.  
  
\*⌊Primarily, *vānyà, abhivānyà, apivānyà, nivānyà*, as gerundives of  
*van*, mean 'to be won over to *or* wonted to': *abhivānyavatsá* is 'a  
calf that has to be wonted to' its new or adoptive mother. Such a word  
as the last, with *bahuvrīhi* accent, means '(a cow) possessing such a  
calf,' and by inference, 'a cow that has lost her own calf': so  
*abhivānyàvatsā*, AB. vii. 2, and Hiraṇyakeśi-sūtra, in Caland's  
Pitṛmedha-sūtras, p. 58⁸; *apivānyàvatsā*, Kāuś., twice?, see below;  
*nivānyàvatsā*, śB. xii. 5. 1⁴.—These possessives are then abbreviated,  
and we find *abhivānyà* at TB. i. 6. 8⁴ and four times in the  
Pitṛmedhasūtras (see Caland's Index), and *nivānyā̀* at śB. ii. 6. 1⁶,  
both words with the same meaning as *abhivānyàvatsā*, but coming to it  
secondarily; and also *vānyā̀* at TB. ii. 6. 16², p. 676 Poona, glossed  
by *mṛtavatsā dhenuḥ*, and ĀpśS. viii. 15. 17, as equivalent of the not  
quotable *vānyàvatsā*.—After putting to paper the explanations just  
given I find them confirmed by *Nārāyaṇa*, to whom I was brought by  
Aufrecht's valuable note upon his excerpt from Sāyaṇa's comment on AB.  
vii. 2 (p. 377): Nārāyaṇa, in his comm. on AśS. iii. 10. 17 says  
*abhivānyavatsā nāmā ’nyavatsena dohanīyā: abhivānyo vatso yasyāḥ sā  
’bhivānyavatsā: abhivānyo ‘bhivananīya ity arthaḥ.*—In Kāuś. 82. 22  
there can be little doubt (cf. BR. i. 347) that we have to read  
*apivānyavatsām* after *ādahane ca;* and in like manner, at 80. 25,  
*apivānyavatsāyās:* with the latter passage is to be compared śB. ii. 6.  
1⁶, which describes the same ceremony; see also Caland,  
*Todtengebräuche*, p. 151. The use of the milk of a cow whose calf is  
dead is in keeping with the use of cows that are old, ugly, barren,  
etc.: cf. śB. xii. 5. 1⁴ (dead man's *agnihotra*) and Caland, l.c., p.  
173, p. 20.⌋
</details>

<details><summary>Griffith</summary>

I offer in Vaisvanara this oblation, thousandfold spring that pours a hundred steamlets. This with a swelling flow supports the Father, supports grand- fathers and their sires before them.
</details>
