+++
title = "४९ आ प्र"

+++

<details><summary>Whitney</summary>

### Translation
49. Start ye (du.) forward hither, wipe off that which the portents (?  
*abhibhā́*) have said there of you; from that come ye, inviolable ones,  
to this which is better, being bestowers here on me, a giver to the  
Fathers.

### Notes
This is highly obscure, and the second half-verse, especially, is  
rendered only mechanically, and even then with substitution of *vásīyas*  
where nearly all the mss. have *váśīyas* or *vaśīyas* (our M.I.D., and  
one of SPP's, *vaśāyas*, which our text, quite unsuccessfully, emends to  
*vaśā́ya*); SPP. admits *váśīyas* in his text; the comm. has *vásīyas*.  
According to Kāuś. (82. 40), the verse is addressed to the two kine (the  
comm. says, the two that have drawn the hearse): the direction is *iti  
gāvāv upayachati;* it is perhaps intended as a purification of them  
after the ill-omened service which they have performed. In **c** the  
vocative, *aghnyāu*, is an emendation, SPP. reading with the mss.  
*aghnyāú;* but the accentuation of the mss. is here very  
unauthoritative; the comm. also takes the word as vocative. Nearly all  
our mss. (all save O.Op.R.) leave *ūcus* in **b** without accent. The  
comm. is not ashamed to derive *abhibhās* formally from *abhi-bhū*, and  
to explain it by *abhibhāvakās* or *dūṣakās;* his general explication of  
the pāda, as intimating a reproach brought against the pair for having  
been engaged in such business, is doubtless good. The defective meter  
suggests a corruption of the text. The comm. takes *iha* and *bhojanāu*  
in **d** as two independent words, and renders *bhojanāu* by  
*bhojayitārāu* or *pālayitārāu*. Two of SPP's mss. also accent the words  
separately. ⌊On his margin Whitney pencilled the memorandum, "Recast  
this note."⌋ ⌊In Ppp., immediately after our xvii. 1. 30, comes this  
verse. Its appearance in that place is possibly to be interpreted as a  
hint at the existence in Ppp. of our book xviii., of which, however,  
there are no other traces in Ppp. save the straggling verses 1. 46 (in  
ii.), 2. 13 (in xix.), 2. 17 and 3. 56 (in xx.).⌋ ⌊☞ Last addition  
misplaced: see p. 1016.⌋
</details>

<details><summary>Griffith</summary>

Depart ye two: wipe ye away whatever omens of evil fortune here have told you. Go from this man, both Steers, to him who wills it: ye are my joys here by the giver's Fathers.
</details>
