+++
title = "५० एयमगन् दक्षिणा"

+++

<details><summary>Whitney</summary>

### Translation
50. This sacrificial gift hath come excellently to us, given by him,  
well-milking, vigor-bestowing; old age, coming close to (? *upa-pṛc*)  
them living in youth, shall lead these away together unto the Fathers.

### Notes
According to Kāuś. (82. 41, the next rule to that which quotes the  
preceding verse), the verse accompanies the giving ⌊or receiving: comm.⌋  
of a *dakṣiṇā* or sacrificial gift of at least ten kine ⌊the comm. says  
one⌋, at the close of the after-cremation ceremonies. But this gives no  
clew to the meaning of the second half-verse, whose connection with the  
first remains very obscure. The two editions agree in their text  
throughout, but *upapṛ́ñcatī* is obviously an inadmissible accentuation,  
requiring emendation to *upapṛñcatī́;* and it is against all rule to  
accent any but the last of two or more prefixes to the same verb: hence  
*upasampárāṇayāt*—which accent is given by ⌊two or⌋ three of SPP's  
authorities, and which he therefore had good reason for adopting (it is  
also given by our O.Op.R., all collated after our publication). ⌊If I  
understand the Collation Book, O.R. accent *upasám párā-*.⌋ Three of our  
*pada*-mss. (Bp.Kp.D., but D. not accented) make the anomalous division  
*upa॰sám: parānayāt;* the other (Op.) has *upa॰sampárānayāt*, which is  
the regular and proper form: see Prāt. iv. 2 and note, and iv. 7. In  
**c**, our Bp.D. (but D. without accent) have the strange reading *yāú:  
váne*, and Op. *yāuváneṣu;* while Bs. ⌊O.K.⌋ also accent *yāú váne*, as  
do two of SPP's mss. (three others *yāuváne*, and only two, with our  
M.T.R.s.m., *yāúvane*).
</details>

<details><summary>Griffith</summary>

From a good quarter have we gained this guerdon, gift of this man, strength giving, plenteous milker. Bringing in youth old age unto the living, may she bear these together to the Fathers.
</details>
