+++
title = "५२ एदं बर्हिरसदो"

+++

<details><summary>Whitney</summary>

### Translation
52. Thou hast sat upon this *barhís*, thou hast become sacrificial; let  
the Fathers acknowledge thee who art departed; collect thy body  
according to its joints; I arrange thy members with *bráhman*.

### Notes
  
  
  
  
  
The reading *yathāparú* in **c** is an emendation, made alike by both  
editions;\* the comm. has it, but all the mss. give *yathāpurú*—which is  
perhaps not altogether untranslatable: 'according to its muchness.' We  
should expect in **b** rather *jānan* than another *jānatu* (51 **d**).  
The verse evidently belongs with its predecessor ⌊used at 80. 51⌋, but  
is entirely separated from it in ritual use, accompanying, according to  
Kāuś. 85. 25, ⌊the assembling of the bones so as to form a human figure,  
as explained under 3. 25⌋; next after it are quoted 2. 24, 26 and 3.  
25-37. Pāda **b** has an extra syllable. ⌊With regard to the place of  
the vs., see p. 870, ¶1, and p. 870, end.⌋  
  
\*⌊In support of the emendation, SPP. adduces ix. 5. 4, with its  
*yathāparú* and *paruśás*. I think that *yathāparú* (as against  
*yathāpurú*) is strongly supported by the sense (much less so by the  
mss.) of the two Kāuśikan passages which give the ritual for ix. 5. 4  
and for this vs. respectively, to wit, 64. 10 and 85. 25. In the latter  
passage the mss. have *yathāparuḥ saṁcinoti* (one, *-puru*), and Keśava  
says *yathāparu*, and Bloomfield emends to *yathāparu;* but I am not  
quite sure that it is necessary, for *yathāparus* may not be bad  
Sanskrit.⌋
</details>

<details><summary>Griffith</summary>

Set on this grass thou hast become a victim. Fathers shall know thee yonder when they meet thee. Gather thy body, limb by limb, together: I by the power of prayer arrange thy members.
</details>
