+++
title = "५३ पर्णो राजापिधानम्"

+++

<details><summary>Whitney</summary>

### Translation
53. King leaf is the cover of the dishes; the strength of refreshment,  
the power, vigor, hath come to us, dispensing (*vi-dhā*) life-time to  
the living (pl.), in order to length of life for a hundred autumns.

### Notes
The comm. reads in **a**, against the *pada*-text and the metrical  
requirement, the later abbreviated *pidhānam*. It understands by *parṇa*  
('leaf') the tree so called, or the *palāśa*-tree; and this may be  
correct; this tree, it says, owing to its sacrificial quality, is the  
overlord of trees. ⌊Cf. the synonyms *brahmapādapa* (in Hemacandra) and  
*yājñika, viprapriyā* (in Rājanighaṇṭu): cf. also *brahma vāi palāśah*,  
śB. xiii. 8. 4¹.⌋ It takes *ūrjás* as a nominative, which makes a  
decidedly easier reading, but is unsupported by Vedic usage elsewhere.  
Only two or three mss. (including our Op.) read in **c** *vidádhat*, the  
rest *vídadhat* (and the *pada*-mss. *ví॰dadhat*, which is absurd ⌊cf.  
note to xiii. 3. 17⌋, but rather indicates that the word was correctly  
viewed as a participle); and SPP. accepts *vídadhat*, p. *ví॰dadhat*,  
because the comm. supports the majority of the mss. by understanding *ví  
dadhat*. The true reading is, beyond all reasonable question,  
*vidádhat*, as our text gives it. The meter seems to be viewed by the  
Anukr. as 10 + 11: 8 + 11 = 40; it is rather too irregular to merit a  
name. Its use\* in Kāuś. (86. 6) follows that of vs. 36 above; it  
accompanies the laying of middle-foliage (? *madhyamapalāśās*) down upon  
the offering dishes: the comm. says, more explicitly, upon the nine  
dishes spoken of in vss. 16-24, and also upon the perforated plates  
(*madhyapalāśapatrāir ācchādayet*); Keśava's explanation corresponds  
closely with this.  
  
\*⌊The *palāśa* has ternate leaves, from 8 to 16 inches long: Roxburgh,  
*Flora Indica*, p. 540, Calc. ed. 1874. By *madhyama parṇa* or *palāśa*  
is meant the middle one of any of these ternate groups; the middle one  
is especially fit for holy use by reason of its likeness to a  
sacrificial ladle: TB. i. 6. 10³, *madhyaména parṇéna juhoti: srúg ghy  
èṣā́:* cf. also Sāyaṇa on TS. i. 8. 6, p. 1167, Poona. I am indebted to  
Caland's excellent paragraphs on this subject, ZDMG. liii. 212.—The  
"nine dishes" are the last nine of the eleven whose deposition is  
explained above, under vs. 16. The "plates" are the leaky old dishes  
noticed above under vs. 36.⌋
</details>

<details><summary>Griffith</summary>

The royal Parna is the caldrons' cover: strength have we gained, force, power, and might, and vigour. Bestowing length of life upon the living, for long existence through a hundred autumns.
</details>
