+++
title = "५४ ऊर्जो भागो"

+++

<details><summary>Whitney</summary>

### Translation
54. The share of refreshment that generated this man;—the stone attained  
(*gam*) the overlordship of the foods;—him praise ye, all-befriended,  
with oblations; may that Yama make (*dhā*) us to live further.

### Notes
  
  
  
  
  
The second half-verse is identical with 3. 63 **c, d** above. The  
translation of the first half is purely mechanical, the sense being  
wholly obscure. The comm. renders *bhāgás* by *sambhaktā*, and *ūrjás*  
by *annasyā ’sthisamīpasthāpitacarulakṣaṇasya*, *yamas* being the  
implied subject; then the 'stone' is the one used to cover the same  
*annāni* or *caravas*. A couple of our mss. (O.R.) and one of SPP's read  
in **b** *áśvā́ ’nnām;* several (including our O.Op.R.) have  
*ádhipatyam*. Some of ours (O.R.K.) and three of SPP's leave *jagāma*  
without an accent, which seems better, and is implied in the  
translation. One of SPP's gives *bhāgám* in **a**. In Kāuś. (86. 7) the  
verse is used next after 53, and accompanies the covering of the same  
dishes with stones—or, the comm. adds, with bricks. ⌊Cf. Caland,  
*Todtengebräuche*, p. 157.⌋ It lacks a syllable in **a**. Our edition  
leaves *viśvamitrās* in this verse without accent, on the authority of  
two of our mss. (Bp.M.); all SPP's give *viśvámitrās*, p.  
*viśvá॰mitrāḥ*, as in 3. 63, and he accepts this in his text. The two  
verses ought of course to be made to agree, but there is little reason  
for preferring either nominative or vocative ⌊the comm. takes the  
doubtful word as voc.⌋. ⌊If the Viśvāmitras be not meant here and at 3.  
63, then Weber's observations reported under 3. 16 lose some of their  
basis.⌋
</details>

<details><summary>Griffith</summary>

The share of vigour which gave this man being, the stone won lordship over foods that nourish. Hymn this with your oblations, Visvamitras: may he, may Yama, lengthen our existence.
</details>
