+++
title = "५५ यथा यमाय"

+++

<details><summary>Whitney</summary>

### Translation
55. As the five clans (*mānavá*) scattered (*vap*) a dwelling (*harmyá*)  
for Yama, so do I scatter a dwelling, that there may be many of me (?).

### Notes
A corresponding verse is found in TA. (in vi. 6. 2); it reads *hārmyám*  
in **a** and **c**, and *evám* in **c**; and for **d** *yáthā́ ’sāma  
jīvaloké bhū́rayas*, which, however unmetrical, is at least capable of  
being translated, while this can hardly be claimed for our **d**. All  
the mss. read at the end *ásatas*, save one of SPP's, which follows the  
comm. in giving *ásata*, as is read in both editions—in ours, purely as  
an emendation. The comm. makes no difficulty of taking *ásata* as =  
*syāta*, and explaining "that ye my relatives may be numerous"; but that  
would be *ásatha;* and *ásata* has no grammatical standing of any kind,  
and hence is to be rejected. The comparison with TA. at least shows that  
the pāda is corrupt. The comm. foolishly divides *evā́vapāmi* in **c**  
into *eva āvapāmi*. Three of our *pada*—mss. (not Op.) most absurdly  
divide *áva-pan* in **b**; it is strange that SPP. reports nothing of  
the kind from his authorities. By Kāuś. (86. 11) the verse is used next  
after 2. 50 etc., with the direction *iti saṁśritya* ('on finishing the  
pile'?); the comm. says that with it they are to divide (*kuṭṭay*)  
leftwise, with sticks or bricks, the part of the cemetery on which the  
pile stood: in TA. it accompanies the "placing in the jar \[of relics\]  
the drugs called *sarvāuṣadhi*" (hence, perhaps, the use of *vap* in the  
verse, as they are strewn in); ⌊but cf. Caland, *Todtengebräuche*, p.  
149⌋. ⌊On *saṁśritya* (?) and *kuṭṭayeyus*.—Kāuś. 86. 10 reads: *idam id  
vā u na* (xviii. 2. 50) *upa sarpa* (3. 49) *asāu hā* (4 .66) *iti  
cinvanti*. Sūtra 11 continues: *yathā yamāya* (4. 55) *iti saṁśritya*.  
Upon 10, Keś. says: *śilābhir* (? *śalākābhir?*) *viṣamābhir iṣṭakābhir  
vā prasavyaṁ cinvanti śmaśānam*. And the AV. comm., in giving the ritual  
for 2. 50 (p. 115) and 3. 49 (p. 161) and 4. 66 (p. 233), says:  
*śmaśānadeśaṁ viṣamasaṁkhyākābhiḥ śalākābhir iṣṭakābhir vā prasavyaṁ  
cinuyāt*, using the very same words in all three passages, save that he  
leaves out the second word in the second passage. Then, for 4. 55 (p.  
224) he says: *śalākābhir iṣṭakābhir vā prasavyaṁ citaṁ śmaśānapradeśam  
kuṭṭayeyuḥ*.—In all these passages, *śmaśāna* or *śmaśāna-deśa* or  
*-pradeśa* must mean the mound which they heap (*ci*) over the buried  
bones: cf. śB. xiii. 8. 1¹ *athā ’smāi śmaśānaṁ kurvanti, gṛhān vā  
prajñānaṁ vā* ('or as a monument'), and Harisvāmin's comment, p. 1017¹⁵,  
*śmaśānam prasiddham asthi-saṁrakṣa-vāstu;* the mound is, as with us,  
not quite knee-high, śB. xiii. 8. 3¹², *adhojānu*.—The meaning of our  
comm. on 4. 55, accordingly, seems to be: 'after the mound has been  
heaped up (*citam*), they should pat (*kuṭṭay*) it with splints of wood  
or with bricks, \[going around it, as they pat it,\] to the left.'—If  
this be right and if *kuṭṭay* is the comm's version of the word after  
*iti* in *sūtra* 11, then I suspect that Bloomfield has not hit the  
right reading in the printed text. Whitney's 'on finishing the pile'  
would call for *saṁsthāpya;* but *saṁśnathya* is much nearer to the  
meaning of *kuṭṭay* and also to the probable intention of Bl's mss., and  
I would accordingly read *saṁśnathya* in place of the printed  
*saṁśritya*. Root *śnath* means 'thrust, push,' in their ordinary and in  
their obscene senses, and here, with *sam*, 'to make \[the mound\]  
compact or firm by striking or beating or patting,' as a modern  
gravemaker pats the mound with his spade to give it shape and firmness.⌋
</details>

<details><summary>Griffith</summary>

As the Five Races of mankind for Yama set apart a house. Even so I set a house apart that greater numbers may be mine.
</details>
