+++
title = "५८ वृषा मतीनाम्"

+++

<details><summary>Whitney</summary>

### Translation
58. There purifies itself the conspicuous bull of the prayers, the sun  
of days, lengthener out of dawns, of the sky (*dív*); the breath of the  
rivers hath made the jars to resound loudly; entering Indra's heart with  
skill.

### Notes
This is a verse out of one of the most formidable hymns of the RV.  
soma-book (RV. ix. 86. 19), and occurring also twice in SV. (i. 559; ii.  
171). In **b**, RV. reads *sómo áhnaḥ pratarītó ’ṣáso diváḥ;* in **c**,  
*krāṇā́* and *avīvaśat;* in **d**, *hā́rdi* and *manīṣíbhis;* with this  
SV. in general agrees, but has, with AV., *áhnām* and *uṣásām* in **b**,  
and *acikradat* in **c**; it is peculiar in reading *prāṇā́* (p.  
*pra॰ānā́*) at beginning of **c**; a corruption, doubtless, which is  
carried out to greater intelligibility in our *prāṇás*. The AV.  
corruption, of both sense and meter, in **b**, *pratárītā uṣ-*,  
supported by the *pada*-reading *pra॰tárītāḥ*, is very strange; of our  
mss., only three (O.K., supported by Op. *-tā: uṣ-*) have the correct  
*-to ’ṣ-*; of SPP's, according to his account, about half support *-to  
’ṣ-*, and he accordingly admits that reading into his text; we ought to  
have done the same by emendation. For *hā́rdim āviśán* (p. *ā॰viśán*)  
*man-*, the comm. reads *hārdima...aviśat...mau-*.⌋ What right the verse  
has here (or vs. 60, coming from the same RV. hymn) does not appear;  
neither Kāuś. nor the comm. uses it in the ritual; but the latter says,  
as if by way of excuse, that, as the Fathers enjoy the fruit of the  
soma-sacrifices which they have offered, soma is praised in the  
ceremonies for the Fathers. He explains the 'rivers' in **c** as the  
*vasatīvarī* waters. ⌊He says, p. 224²³, *vṛṣā matīnām ityādīnāṁ  
tisṛṇām* (vss. 58, 59, 60) *pitṛmedha eva kāṇḍokto viniyogo  
‘nusaṁdheyaḥ*, which is not clear to me: should it be *pitṛmedhakāṇḍa  
evokto?*⌋
</details>

<details><summary>Griffith</summary>

Far-seeing he flows on, the Bull, the Lord of hymns, promoter of the Sun, of Days, of Dawns, of Heaven. Breath of the rivers he hath roared into the jars, and through his wisdom entered into Indra's heart.
</details>
