+++
title = "६० प्र वा"

+++

<details><summary>Whitney</summary>

### Translation
60. Soma (*índu*) verily goes forward to Indra's rendezvous; the comrade  
does not violate (*pra-mī*) the comrade's agreements; thou rushest to  
join, as a male after females—soma, in the jar, by a road of a hundred  
tracks.

### Notes
The verse corresponds to RV. ix. 86. 16, which has, however, important  
variants: in **a**, *pró ayāsīd índur* and *niṛkṛtám;* in **b**,  
*saṁgíram;* in **c**, *yuvatíbhis* and *arṣati;* in **d**, *śatáyāmnā;*  
SV. (i. 557; ii. 502) agrees with RV. except in the last item, having,  
like our text, *-yāmanā*. ⌊The meter shows that it is to be pronounced  
*-yāmanā*, whichever way it is written: cf. JAOS. x. 532.⌋ Our  
*níṣkṛtim* is hardly better than a corruption of the RV. reading; but  
the comm. understands it as Indra's "belly" (*jaṭharalakṣaṇāṁ sthānam*),  
and supports his opinion by quoting RV. iii. 35. 6. *Saṁgirás*, in  
**b**, is understood in the translation as *saṁgíras* (which is read by  
two or three mss., including our O.), the former being unintelligible;  
the comm. gives two explanations, both implying the accent *-gír-*, one  
from *sam-gṛ* 'agree,' the other from *sam-gṛ* or *-gil* 'swallow down,'  
thus finding in the verse another "belly" (*saṁgiras* = *saṁgiram* =  
*udaram*). Our text of **c** spoils both the meter and the connection,  
making the line render very lamely; the comm. reads *yóṣā* and takes it  
as an instrumental (like *yuvatíbhis*); in **d** he has the RV.SV.  
reading. The metrical definition of the Anukr. is worthless. ⌊The RV.  
verse is a good *jagatī*, and so is this, barring **c**, where the  
corruptions have spoiled meter as well as sense.⌋
</details>

<details><summary>Griffith</summary>

Indu is moving forth to Indra's destined place, and slights not as a friend the promise of his friend. Thou, Soma, comest nigh as bridegroom meets the bride, reach- ing the beaker by a course of hundred paths.
</details>
