+++
title = "६१ अक्षन्नमीमदन्त ह्यव"

+++

<details><summary>Whitney</summary>

### Translation
61. They have eaten; they have revelled ⌊surely⌋; they have shaken off  
(*áva*) those that are dear; having own brightness (*svábhānu*), they  
have praised; inspired, youngest, we implore.

### Notes
The verse corresponds to RV. i. 82. 2 **a-d**, and is found also in  
other texts: SV. i. 415; VS. iii. 51; TS. in i. 8. 5²; MS. in i. 10. 3.  
All these agree in reading in **c** *priyā́s* for *priyā́n*, and, for  
**d**, *víprā náviṣṭhayā matī́;* and they add a fifth pāda, a refrain,  
having nothing to do with the meaning of the verse. A majority of the  
AV. mss. (including our M.O.Op.R.K.D.) read *ávā ’priyā́ṅ* (p. *áva:  
apriyā́n*), and this is perhaps the true Atharvan text (though the  
accent, in that case, should be *ávā́ ’priyān*), and defensible on the  
ground of sense; our last pāda is nothing but a senseless corruption. In  
Kāuś. (88. 27) the verse is used, next after vss. 81 ff.,\* in the  
*piṇḍapitṛyajña*, with the direction *ity uttarasicam avadhūya;* the  
comm. paraphrases this to mean that one is to perform an additional  
sprinkling (? *uttarapariṣeka*) next after the worship (*upasthāna*) of  
the *piṇḍas*. For the application of the verse to the Fathers, compare  
TB. ii. 6. 3², *ákṣan pitáraḥ:* *ámīmadanta pitáraḥ*, etc.; ⌊also  
Sāyaṇa's comm. on TS. i. 8. 5², Poona ed., p. 1159⌋. \*⌊It is to be  
noted that in the *piṇḍapitṛyajña* of the VS. (ii. 31), *amīmadanta  
pitaraḥ* etc. comes just before the verses corresponding to our vss.  
81-85.⌋ ⌊śGS., i. 15, prescribes the RV. verse for use when the bride  
greases the axle of the wedding-car: is this because of the resemblance  
of *akṣam* ('axle') to *akṣan* (root *ghas*)?!⌋ ⌊See p. lxxix.⌋
</details>

<details><summary>Griffith</summary>

Well have they eaten and rejoiced: their dear ones have they shaken off. Sages, self-luminous, have praised: we who are youngest supplicate.
</details>
