+++
title = "६२ आ यात"

+++

<details><summary>Whitney</summary>

### Translation
62. Come ye, O Fathers, delectable, by profound roads that the Fathers  
travel, assigning to us lifetime and progeny; and do ye attach  
yourselves to us with abundances of wealth.

### Notes
The last pāda was found above as ix. 4. 24 **d**. Corresponding verses  
are found in HGS. ii. 10. 5 and MB. ii. 3. 5. For **a, b**, MB. reads  
*eta pitaraḥ somyāso gambhīrebhiḥ pathibhiḥ pūrviṇebhiḥ;* and as second  
half-verse it has our 3. 14 **c, d**. HGS. has *ā yāta pitaraḥ somyā  
gambhīraḥ* (misprint for *-rāiḥ?*) *pathibhiḥ pūrvyāiḥ*, with an  
altogether different **c, d**. We should prefer *somyāsas* unaccented,  
both in this verse and in the next, but no ms. so reads. The comm. has  
in **c** *dadhata*, which he pronounces the same as *dhatta*. In Kāuś.,  
in the *pitṛnidhana* ceremony, the verse accompanies (83. 27) the  
bringing of the bone-relics, before sunset ⌊into the hut: Keś.⌋; and it  
is followed (83. 28, 29) by 1. 52 and 2. 29; then, in the  
*piṇḍapitṛyajña* (87. 28), the three are repeated; the comm. notices  
only the latter use, stating that with this verse one is to scatter  
sesame on the *barhis* spread for the purpose of giving the *piṇḍas*. In  
number of syllables, the verse answers to the description of the Anukr.  
(9+ 10: 11 + 11 = 41). ⌊The MB. reading makes a rectification of the  
meter at the beginning of **b**.⌋
</details>

<details><summary>Griffith</summary>

Come hither, Fathers, who deserve the Soma, by the deep path- ways which the Fathers travel. Bestow upon us life and store of children, and favour us with increase of our riches.
</details>
