+++
title = "६३ परा यात"

+++

<details><summary>Whitney</summary>

### Translation
63. Go away, O Fathers, delectable, by profound roads that go to the  
stronghold (*pūryā́ṇa*); then, in a month, come ye again to our houses to  
eat the oblation, with good progeny, with good heroes.

### Notes
All the *pada*-mss. commit the strange blunder of dividing *ā́yāta* in  
**c** into *ā́: ayāta;* both editions make the necessary correction; the  
comm. also understands *ā yāta*. In **d**, some of the mss. make great  
difficulty over *áttum*, reading also ⌊*annum*,⌋, *atnum*, *antum*,  
*atnūn*, and the comm. gives as a compound *haviratnūn;* but our O.R.D.,  
and the majority of SPP's authorities, have the correct reading; as does  
also HGS. in its corresponding verse ⌊ii. 13. 2⌋. HGS. ⌊spoils the meter  
of **a** by modernizing *somyā́sas* to⌋ *somyās;* reads in **b**  
*pūrvyāis;* ⌊and begins **c** with *atha*⌋. The first half-verse occurs  
also in MS. i. 10. 3 and AśS. ii. 7. 9. MS. makes nearly good meter of  
it, reading *páre ’tana pitaraḥ somyāso gambhīrébhiḥ pathíbhiḥ  
pūrvébhiḥ* (which should evidently be emended to *pūrvyébhis*); AśS.  
differs from this only by having at the end *pūrviṇebhis* (with K. and  
Kap.S., as pointed out by Schröder). Prāt. iii. 83 quotes the word  
*pūryāṇa*. Kaug. uses the verse in the *piṇḍapitṛyajña* (88. 28), next  
after vs. 61, in dismissing the Fathers after their feast of *piṇḍas*.  
The metrical description of the Anukr. is very poor: ⌊it is probable  
that the verse originally was 11 + 11: 12 + 11; but its **b** is spoiled  
metrically⌋.
</details>

<details><summary>Griffith</summary>

Depart, O Fathers, ye who merit Soma, by the deep pathways which the Fathers travel; But in a month, rich in fair sons and heroes, come back into our homes to eat oblation.
</details>
