+++
title = "७० प्रास्मत् पाशान्"

+++

<details><summary>Whitney</summary>

### Translation
70. Release from us all fetters, O Varuṇa, with which one is bound  
crosswise, with which lengthwise; so may we live hundreds of autumns, by  
thee, O king, guarded, defended.

### Notes
The rendering of *samāmé* and *vyāmé* in **b** is far from certain: cf.  
iv. 16. 8. The comm. explains: *samāmo nāma vyāmasaṁjñitapradeśāt  
saṁkucitapramāṇako deśaḥ: saṁnihite pradeśe dūre pradeśe ce ’ti yāvat*.  
Two of our mss. (O.R.) and one of SPP's read *samāné;* and two or three  
of the latter have *badhyate*, without accent. Nearly all, again, read  
*śarádam* in **c** (our O.R.p.m. Land one of SPP's⌋ *-das*), and SPP.  
admits *śarádam* into his text; our *-dām* is an emendation, and a  
necessary one, unless we take instead *-das*, as in apposition with  
*śatā́ni*. The comm. makes no difficulty of reading *-dam*, understanding  
it, according to one of his convenient rules of interpretation, as a  
sing. used in place of a plural. Most of our mss., again (except  
P.O.Op.R.), but only one of SPP's, accent *rā́jan*. The comm. points out  
that *rákṣamāṇās* is for *rákṣya-*, which is altogether probable,  
considering how easily a *y* is lost after *ṣ* or *ś*. The first pāda is  
identical with vii. 83. 4 **a**. All the *pada*-mss. except one of SPP's  
read *gupitā́* instead of *-tā́ḥ*. The comm. directs the verse to be  
recited for good fortune evening and morning at the end of the  
*daśarātra* in the *pitṛmedha*.
</details>

<details><summary>Griffith</summary>

From all those bonds, O Varuna, release us, wherewith a man is bound at length and cross-wise. Then may we live a hundred autumn seasons guarded by thee, O King, by thee protected.
</details>
