+++
title = "०६ एकं रजस"

+++

<details><summary>Whitney</summary>

### Translation
6. There is one other thing beyond the welkin; there is something, hard  
to attain, hitherward from what is beyond: this I Varuṇa, knowing it,  
proclaim to thee. Be the *paṇi*'s of degraded speech; let the barbarians  
creep (*sṛp*) downward to the earth.

### Notes
The translation implies emendation of *varuṇa* to *váruṇaḥ* in **c**,  
which seems necessary, as the verse evidently belongs in Varuṇa's mouth;  
both Roth and Muir so understand it. In **d** is implied *adhóvacasas*,  
which all the mss. read; alteration to *-varcasas* might be welcome, but  
is hardly called for. Ppp. is considerably different; it reads: *ya ekam  
enā rajasaṣ paro ‘sti pare ’kena dūḍāhyaṁ tyajan yat: tat tve  
acchovacasaṣ dāsā yā upa sarpantu riprā*. The meter of **a** would be  
rectified by omitting the superfluous end; that of **b**, by a like  
omission (which the Pāipp. text also favors), or, so far as the meaning  
is concerned, better by reading *enā́ páreṇa dur-* etc. The description  
of the verse by the Anukr. as an *atiśakvari* (though it still lacks one  
syllable of sixty) helps to authenticate the text as the mss. present  
it.  
  
⌊Whitney, on the revision, would doubtless have made clear his views as  
to **b**. Both sense and meter indicate that the *enā́* in **a** and the  
*enā́* in **b** are intrusions; they have blundered in from 5 **c**.  
Omitting them, I render: 'There is one other thing beyond the welkin;  
\[and,\] beyond \[that\] one thing, \[is\] something hard to get at  
(*durṇáśaṁ cit*) \[if you start\] from this side \[of them\].'⌋ ⌊I  
understand *tat tve acchovacasaṣ* to mean merely that Ppp. reads *tve*  
for *te* and *acchovacasaṣ* for *adhovacasaḥ*—not that it omits the rest  
from *te* to *nīcāir*.⌋
</details>

<details><summary>Griffith</summary>

One thing there is beyond this air, and something beyond that one, most hard to reach, remotest. I, Varuna, who know, to thee declare it. Let churls be mighty in the lower regions. Let Dasas sink into the earth beneath them.
</details>
