+++
title = "०२ मा न"

+++

<details><summary>Whitney</summary>

### Translation
2. Do not ye, O waters, devastate (*pra-math*) our wisdom nor our  
*bráhman;* come ye flowing with easy flow, being invoked; \[be\] I of  
good wisdom, having splendor.

### Notes
All the mss. accent *ā́pas* in **a**, and SPP. refuses to follow us in  
the obvious emendation to *āpas*, although the comm. also takes the word  
as vocative. At the end of **b**, the comm., followed by three of SPP's  
authorities, has *mathiṣṭa naḥ*. In **c**, the mss. read *śuṣyadā́* (p.  
the same), and the comm. understands it as *śuṣyat: ā;* SPP. emends by  
conjecture to *suṣyadā́s* (p. *su॰syadā́ḥ*), which is decidedly more  
successful than our *śuṣmadā́s*. The translation, however, ventures to  
emend yet further, to *suṣyádā́* (p. *su॰syádā: ā́*). Most of the mss.  
give *syannadhvam;* ⌊W's O. and SPP's carefully corrected Dc., s.m.,⌋  
join with the comm. in *syanda-*, which stands in both printed texts.  
The translation, finally, implies our reading *úpahūtās*, against the  
mss., SPP., and the comm., which give *-tas* (*-to ‘ham*); against,  
also, the Anukr.,\* but making much better meter than if **c** is ended  
with *syandadhvam*. The mss. and SPP. have *sumédhās* (the *p.*-mss.  
wrongly *su॰médhā*); ⌊in the edition⌋ we ⌊should have⌋ rectified the  
accent ⌊so as to read⌋ *sumedhā́s*. \*⌊The Anukr. would scan as 6 + 8: 8  
+ 12; the Berlin text as 6 + 8: 12 + 8.⌋
</details>

<details><summary>Griffith</summary>

Disturb ye not our intellect, O Waters, nor the power of prayer_ Glide on your way, strength-giving, invocated: may I be vigor- ous and wise.
</details>
