+++
title = "०७ तस्मै प्रतीच्या"

+++

<details><summary>Whitney</summary>

### Translation
7. ⌊14.⌋ For him, from all the intermediate directions, they made the  
archer Īśāna attendant. ⌊15.⌋ The archer Īśāna as attendant attends him  
from all the intermediate directions; not śarva, ⌊not Bhava, not Īśāna,  
16. injures him nor his cattle nor his fellows who knoweth thus⌋.

### Notes
The mss. vary in **a** and **b** between *sárvebhyo ant-* and *-bhyo  
‘nt-*; in **a**, only P.M.W.E. have *-bhyo ‘nt-*; in **b**, ⌊at least  
two, E. and⌋ Bs. Probably our text ought to give in both places *-bhyo  
ant-*; ⌊so SPP. with all but two of his authorities⌋.  
  
After the definition of the **c** of 1-7 the Anukr. adds: *hinasti  
vyāghrādiṣv avagantavyaḥ;* which apparently means that in 2-6 is to be  
understood the verb *hinasti*, which is expressed only in 1 **c** and 7  
**c**; *vyāghrādiṣu* is probably a corruption.  
  
⌊After its metrical definition of xi. 1. 36, the Anukr. inserts the  
words *vyāghrādiṣv avagantavyā;* and after that of xiv. 1. 60 occur the  
words (see p. 740) *ity*, or *parāviny, edhiṣīmahīti vyāghrādiṣv  
avagantavyaḥ*.—One ritual use of xiv. 1. 60 is as a prayer for the  
safety of the bride as she sets out for her new home. In that  
connection, a specification of the safety as "in respect of tigers and  
so forth" would be entirely appropriate. And it is also appropriate  
here, at xv. 5.—The verse xi. 1. 36 is used in the ritual (Kāuś. 63. 9)  
with iv. 14. 5 in the *sava* offering: the former, as a prayer for  
safety on the road to heaven (*ágne patháḥ kalpaya devayā́nān*) the  
latter, somewhat similarly (*svàr yantu yájamānāḥ svastí*). Although  
tigers more frequently accelerate than retard a Hindu's transit to  
heaven, the verses may nevertheless be conceived as used secondarily for  
safety on terrestrial paths.—Accordingly the remark of the Anukr is  
perhaps intended as exegetical, but it is at any rate most  
unexpected.—The vs. AV. xii. 1. 49 furnishes testimony (quite  
superfluous) to the familiarity of the ancient Hindus with  
"man-eaters."⌋
</details>

<details><summary>Griffith</summary>

They made Isana the Archer his deliverer from all the inter- mediate regions. Isana the Archer, a deliverer, delivers him from all the intermediate regions. Neither Sarva nor Bhava, nor Isana slays him who possesses this knowledge, or his cattle, or his kinsmen.
</details>
