+++
title = "०५ सूर्यस्य रश्मीननु"

+++

<details><summary>Whitney</summary>

### Translation
5. They who (f.) go about (*sam-car*) after the rays of the sun, or who  
go about after \[its\] beams (*márīci*); of whom the mighty (?  
*vājínīvant*) bull from afar moves around (*pari-i*) at once all the  
worlds, defending—let him come unto us, enjoying this libation, together  
with the atmosphere, he the mighty one.

### Notes
According to the comm., the "they who" and "of whom" in **a** and **c**  
are the Apsarases, this being apparently to him the tie of connection  
between the two divisions of the hymn; and *vājinī* is the dawn, and  
*vājinīvant* the sun: all of which is very questionable, at least. SPP.  
reads in **d** *paryāíti*, with, as he states, the majority of his mss.,  
but with only two of ours; the comm. has *paryeti*, and it is also thus  
quoted by the comment to Prāt. iv. 81. SPP. further leaves the final *n*  
of *sárvān* unassimilated before *lokān*, for the wholly insufficient  
reason that nearly all his mss. so read; the point is one that requires  
to be regulated by the prescriptions of general grammar and of the  
Prāt., without heed to the carelessness of scribes. The passage is even  
one of those quoted under Prāt. ii. 35 as an example of assimilation.  
The metrical definition of the Anukr. is inaccurate, and perhaps  
corrupt; the verse (12 + 11: 12 + 11: 11 + 11 = 68) should be specified  
as of 6 pādas and 3 *avasānas*, like vs. 3; it is not *bhurij;* and for  
*atyaṣṭi* the ⌊London, not the Berlin ms.⌋ reads *jagatyaṣṭi*. ⌊One is  
tempted to suspect the syllable *saṁ-* in **a**. Pronounce *yā́sarṣabhó*  
in **C**.⌋
</details>

<details><summary>Griffith</summary>

Who follow in their course the rays of Surya, or as a particle of light attend him. Whose leader from afar, with store of riches, compasses quickly all the worlds and guards them. Pleased, may he come to this our burnt oblation, together with the Air, enriched with treasure.
</details>
