+++
title = "०१ जरायुजः प्रथम"

+++

<details><summary>Whitney</summary>

### Translation
1. First born of the afterbirth, the ruddy (*usríya*) bull, born of wind  
and cloud (?), goes thundering with rain; may he be merciful to our  
body, going straight on, breaking; he who, one force, hath stridden out  
threefold.

### Notes
The translation implies emendation in **b** to *vātābhrajás* or *-jā́s*,  
as suggested by 3 **c**; it is proposed by Weber, and adopted by  
Bloomfield, being a fairly plausible way of getting out of a decided  
difficulty. Weber renders, however, "with glowing wind-breath"; R.,  
"with scorching wind" (emending to *-bhrajjās*). The comm. reads  
*vātavrajās* (a couple of SPP's mss., which usually follow him, do the  
same), and explains it as "going swiftly like the wind," or,  
alternatively, "having a collection of winds." The 'bull' is to him the  
sun, and he forces this interpretation through the whole hymn. Neither  
he nor Kāuś. nor the latter's scholia see anywhere any intimation of  
lightning; yet this is perhaps most plausibly to be suspected in the  
obscurities of the expression (so R. also). The first words in **a** are  
viewed as signifying 'just escaped from its fœtal envelop (in the  
cloud).' Ppp. is wholly defaced in the second half-verse; in the first  
it offers no variants, merely combining *-jaṣ prath-* in **a**, and  
reading *-bhraja st-* in **b**. Emendation in **d** to *yásyāí' kam*  
would improve both meter and sense. *Tredhā́* in **d** must be read as  
three syllables (as in RV.) to make the verse a full *jagatī*. ⌊At OB.  
vi. 59 b, *vā́ta-dhrajās* is suggested—by R.?⌋
</details>

<details><summary>Griffith</summary>

Born from the womb, brought forth from wind and from the cloud, the first red bull comes onward thundering with the rain. Our bodies may he spare who, cleaving, goes straight on; he who, a single force, divides himself in three.
</details>
