+++
title = "०४ यस्याञ्जन प्रसर्पस्यङ्गमङ्गम्"

+++

<details><summary>Whitney</summary>

### Translation
4. Of whomsoever, O ointment, thou creepest over limb after limb, joint  
after joint, from thence thou drivest away the *yákṣma*, like a  
formidable mid-lier (*madhyamaśī́*).

### Notes
Found also as RV. x. 97. 12 (repeated, without variant, as VS. xii. 86),  
which version, however, begins with *yásyāu ’ṣadhīḥ prasárpatha*, and  
has in **c** correspondingly *bādhadhve*. The comm. has in **c**  
*bādhate*, but regards it as for *bādhase*. Ppp. reads *tasmāt* for  
*tatas*. *Madhyamaśī́* is of obscure meaning; "arbiter," as conjectured  
by BR., seems very implausible ⌊BR. express their conjectural meaning by  
the Latin word *intercessor;* by which, I suspect, they intend, not  
'mediator,' but rather 'adversary' or 'preventer' of the disease, which  
would be plausible enough⌋; more probably mid-most man," like  
*madhyameṣṭhā́* or chief (see under iii. 8. 2), and *madhyamaśī* used  
especially of the leader about whom his men encamp, for his greater  
safety, in the night. JB. has *madhyamaśīvan* at ii. 408, but the  
passage is too corrupt to cast valuable light upon the word. To the  
comm., it is either Vāyu, the wind in mid-air, or else the king, viewed  
as surrounded first by foes, and further by their foes, his friends (on  
the principle of *arir mitram arer; mitram*) ⌊*mitra-mitram ataḥ param*  
etc. I find the verse at Kāmandakīya Nītisāra, viii. 16. To judge from  
the Later Syriac Version (Kalīlah and Dimnah, Keith-Falconer, p. 114),  
one would expect to find it in Pañcatantra ii., colloquy of mouse and  
crow, in Kosegarten's ed., p. 110 or thereabouts. Cf. Manu vii. 158 and  
the comm.⌋
</details>

<details><summary>Griffith</summary>

Whomso thou creepest over, Salve! member by member, joint by joint, From him, like some strong arbiter of strife, thou banishest decline.
</details>
