+++
title = "२० ब्रह्मणे स्वाहा"

+++

<details><summary>Whitney</summary>

### Translation
20. To the *bráhman* (?), hail!

### Notes
SPP. reads *brahmáṇe*, and mentions no disagreement among his  
authorities; all but one or two of ours have the same, and our text  
might probably have been better left to read so; but the accentuation of  
the mss. is wholly unauthoritative, and the distinction here also of no  
manner of importance. The comm. understands *brahmáṇe*. ⌊I think  
*bráhmaṇe* is to be preferred for the reason given at p. 932, line 7.⌋  
Tlie numbers of syllables in the verses agree throughout with those  
demanded by the definitions of the Anukr.  
  
It is a great disappointment to find that the designations given in this  
hymn to the various parts or elements of the Atharvan text are just as  
much a puzzle to the commentator as they are to us, so that he does not  
even venture to conjecture a meaning for them. He understands the  
authors rather than the *mantras* to be meant as the recipients of the  
homage. His whole comment follows: *atra viṅśatikāṇḍātmikāyām asyāṁ  
śākhāyāṁ vidyamānānuvākasūktagaṇaviśeṣādisaṁjñārūpāiḥ śabdāir  
anuvākādidra. ṣṭāra etannāmāna ṛṣayaḥ pratipādyante:  
nīlanakhādisūktaviśeṣāṇām prasiddhatvāt tāni viśeṣato na pradarśitāni:  
**brahmaṇe svāhe** ’ti brahmaśabdena viṅśatikāṇḍātmakavedavācakena tasya  
draṣṭā brahmākhya ṛṣiḥ pratipādyate: anyat sarvaṁ nigadavyākhyātam*. It  
sounds like a bad joke that he calls *nīlanakha* etc. 'familiarly  
known.' That *anuvāka* is used in vs. 1 in the same sense as in the  
present division of the text seems very unlikely.
</details>

<details><summary>Griffith</summary>

To Brahma, Hail!
</details>
