+++
title = "०१ ये अग्नयो"

+++

<details><summary>Whitney</summary>

### Translation
1. The fires that are within the waters, that are in Vṛtra, that are in  
man, that are in stones, the one that hath entered the herbs, the  
forest-trees—to those fires be this oblation made.

### Notes
Verses 1-4 are found also in MS. (ii. 13. 13) and in K. (xl. 3); both  
texts read *yás* for *yé* through the first half-verse, and *áśmani* for  
*áśmasu;* MS. begins *yó apsv àntár agnír*, and K. *yó apsv àgnír  
antár;* K. further has *bhuvanāni viśvā* for *óṣadhīr yó vánaspátīṅs*.  
Ppp. reads *yo apsv antar yo vṛtre antar yaḥ puruṣe yo ‘śmani: yo viveśa  
oṣa-*, and combines in **d** *tebhyo ‘gni-*. Part of the mss. (including  
our P.M.W.I.) combine *vivéś’ óṣadh-* in **c**, and both editions have  
adopted that reading—doubtless wrongly, since the Prāt. prescribes no  
such irregularity, nor is it elsewhere found to occur with *oṣadhi*. The  
comm. explains what different "fires" are intended: the *vāḍava* etc. in  
the waters; that in the cloud (by Nir. ii. 16) or else in the body of  
the Asura Vṛtra; in man, those of digestion; in stones, those in the  
*sūryakānta* etc. (sparkling jewels); those that make herbs etc. ripen  
their fruits. Weber regards the stones that strike fire as intended,  
which seems more probable. The division of the verse by the Anukr., 8 +  
11: 11 + 11, is not to be approved. ⌊Pādas **a** and **b** rather as 11  
+ 8; pādas **c** and **d** are in order, 12 + 11.—In **c**, correct to  
*āvivéśāúṣadhīr*, as MS. reads.⌋
</details>

<details><summary>Griffith</summary>

All Fires that are in water and in Vritra, all those that man and stones contain within them, That which hath entered herbs and trees and bushes--to all these Fires be this oblation offered.
</details>
