+++
title = "०२ कृणुत धूमम्"

+++

<details><summary>Whitney</summary>

### Translation
2. Make ye smoke, O ye bulls, companions, ye that are aided by the  
unhateful (?), unto speech; this Agni \[is\] fight-overpowering, having  
good heroes, by whom the gods overpowered the barbarians.

### Notes
The second pāda is mechanically rendered, being quite corrupt, as  
appears ⌊from the meter and⌋ by comparison with the corresponding RV.  
verse (iii. 29. 9), which reads instead *ásredhanta itana vā́jam ácha*.  
The comm. explains *ádrogh-* as *adrohakāriṇāṁ sucaritrāṇāṁ yajamānānām  
avitā rakṣitā*, as if the *pada*-reading were *-avitā* instead of  
*-avitāḥ*. ⌊W's Collation-book gives *-avitāḥ* as *pada*-reading without  
note of variant; and this is the reading also of two or three of SPP's  
mss.: but he admits *-avitā* into his *pada*-text, following one or two  
mss.⌋ RV. begins also *kṛṇóta*, and has *vṛ́ṣaṇam* for *vṛṣaṇas* in  
**a**; also *devā́sas* (rectifying the meter) in **d**. All the mss.  
⌊save one or two⌋ read *asahanta*, unaccented, in **d**, but both  
editions make the necessary emendation to *ásahanta*—which, of course,  
RV. has. Ppp. is corrupt in **d**, reading *devā ’santa*\*; after it  
*śatrūn*. \*⌊A most interesting instance of haplography on the part of  
the AV.: cf. note to iv. 5. 5. Note the fourfold occurrence of the  
sound-combination *ās* within the RV. pāda; and that three of these are  
reduced by Ppp. to one.⌋
</details>

<details><summary>Griffith</summary>

Raise, as I bid, the smoke, my strong companions, lovers of free- dom from deceit and malice! Victor in fight heroic, here is Agni by whom the Gods subdued the hostile demons.
</details>
