+++
title = "०४ यथाखरो मघवंश्चारुरेष"

+++

<details><summary>Whitney</summary>

### Translation
4. As, O bounteous one (*maghávan*), this pleasant covert hath been dear  
to the well-settled (*suṣád*) wild beasts, so let this woman be enjoyed  
of Bhaga, mutually dear, not disagreeing with her husband.

### Notes
The translation here involves emendation of the unmanageable *suṣádā* in  
**b** to *suṣádām*, as suggested by iii. 22. 6. SPP. has in his  
*pada*-text. *su॰sádāḥ* (as if nom. of *suṣádas*), and makes no note  
upon the word—probably by an oversight, as of our *pada*-mss. only Op.  
has such a reading; the comm. understands *suṣádās*, and explains it by  
*sukhena sthātuṁ yogyaḥ* 'comfortable to dwell in'; which is not  
unacceptable. The comm. also has in **a** *maghavān*, and in **d**  
*abhirādhayantī* (= *abhivardhayantī*, or else *putrapaśvādibhiḥ  
samṛddhā bhavantī*). Ppp. has at the beginning *yathā khaṁraṁ maghavaṅ  
cārur eṣu*, and, in **c, d**, *yaṁ vayaṁ juṣṭā bhagasyā ’stu saṁpr-*.  
All our *saṁhitā*-mss. save one (H.), and half of SPP's, give *eṣáḥ pr-*  
in **a-b**; but the comment to Prāt. ii. 57 quotes this passage as  
illustration of the loss of its final *visarga* by *eṣás.* Kāuś. (34.  
14) evidently intends an allusion to this verse in one of its  
directions: *mṛgākharād vedyām mantroktāni* 'the articles mentioned in  
the text on the sacrificial hearth from a wild beast's covert,' but the  
comm. does not explain the meaning. The Anukr. ignores the redundancy of  
a syllable in **c**. ⌊Pronounce *juṣṭā iyam* and reject *nārī?*—The use  
of *sámpriya* in dual and plural is natural: its extension to the  
singular is rather illogical (cf. TS. iv. 2. 4), unless we assign  
intensive value to *sam* ('very dear').⌋
</details>

<details><summary>Griffith</summary>

As this lair, Maghavan! that is fair to look on was dear to wild things as a pleasant dwelling, So may this woman here be Bhaga's darling. Loved by her lord and prizing his affection.
</details>
