+++
title = "१७ यत् क्षुरेण"

+++

<details><summary>Whitney</summary>

### Translation
17. In that with a dangerous (? *marcáyant*) very sharp (*sutejás*)  
razor thou, a hair-dresser, shearest hair and beard, adorning the face,  
do not thou steal away our life-time.

### Notes
The translation given implies in **c** the reading *śúmbhan*, which, it  
can hardly be questioned, is the true one, although it is read by only  
one ms. (our W.) and by Ppp.; the rest of our mss. all have, and our  
edition with them, *śúmbham*. SPP. accepts the unintelligible *śúbham*,  
with the comm., and with, as he reports, the majority of his  
authorities, the rest reading, like ours, *śúmbhaṁ;* the comm. explains  
*śúbham* with *dīptaṁ tejasvi* and has to supply after it *kuru* to make  
any sense. Ppp. further reads *-śmaśrū* in **b**, and *māi ’nam* for *mā  
nas* in **c**. According to the distinct direction of the Prāt. (ii.  
76), we ought to read *ā́yuṣ prá* in **d**, and its authority is  
sufficient to establish that as the true text, against both the  
editions; half SPP's authorities give it, though only one of ours (R.);  
on such a point the mss. are often at odds, and their evidence of little  
weight. The verse occurs also in several Gṛhya-Sūtras, AGS. (i. 17. 16);  
PCS. (ii. 1. 19), and HGS. (i. 9. 16); all read *supeśasā* in **a**; in  
**b**, HGS. has *vaptar*, PGS. *vapati*, AGS. and PGS. *keśān;* in  
**c**, the two latter have *śunddhi śiras*, HGS. *varcayā mukham;* in  
**d**, AGS. and PGS. give *asya* for *nas;* all have *āyuḥ pra*. ⌊Found  
also MP. ii. 1. 7: see also MGS. i. 21. 7 and p. 153.⌋ ⌊Cf. Oldenberg,  
IFA. vi. 184.⌋
</details>

<details><summary>Griffith</summary>

When, with a very keen and cleasing razor, our hair and beards thou shavest as a barber, Smoothing our face steal not our vital forces.
</details>
