+++
title = "०३ यत् ते"

+++

<details><summary>Whitney</summary>

### Translation
3. What \[defense\] those gods fastened on themselves, when fighting for  
overlordship, what defense Indra made for himself, let that protect us  
on all sides.

### Notes
Pāda **b** is altogether corrupt; the translation implies the reading  
*ā́dhirājyāya yodhínaḥ*, which differs a little from the emendation in  
our text, but which the Pet. Lex. assumes under *ādhirājya*. The mss.  
give (*devā́*) *’dhirājayódhehinaḥ*, which the *pada*-text analyzes into  
(*deva:*) *ádhi॰rāja: yáḥ: dhehi: naḥ* (SPP. reports his *pada*-mss. as  
giving at the beginning *devā*, apparently by an oversight, as *devā* is  
no form\*). The comm. has (*devāḥ*) *dyurājayo* (implying p. *dyu॰r-*)  
*dehinaḥ*, and this SPP. accepts, despite its unsatisfactory character;  
the comm. explains *dyurājayas* as *divi dyuloke rājamānās*, which is  
absurd, and adds that, since the wearing of armor implies a body  
(*deha*), the gods were embodied (*dehinas*), which is silly. The  
*pada*-mss. (and one of SPP's *saṁhitā*-mss.) strangely read *sarvátas*  
at the end instead of *viśvátas;* the comm. and both editions accept the  
latter; ⌊and since W. notes nothing to the contrary, his D. presumably  
has *viśvátaḥ*. The text, with **b** as translated, and with *ca-kṛ-e*  
in **c** ⌊making 11 + 8: 8 + 8⌋, answers excellently to the definition  
of the Anukr. \*⌊W. means, I take it, no form which is usable in this  
connection.⌋
</details>

<details><summary>Griffith</summary>

That which the Gods bound on them when they battled for their royal sway. What Indra made his shield, may that protect us well on every side,
</details>
