+++
title = "०४ इहेदसाथ न"

+++

<details><summary>Whitney</summary>

### Translation
4. May ye be just here; may ye not go away (*parás*); may an active  
herdsman (*gopā́*), lord of prosperity, drive you hither; do ye, with  
\[your\] desires, \[attend\] upon (?) his desire; let all the gods  
conduct you together hither.

### Notes
The translation implies emendation in **d** of *-yantu* to *-nayantu*,  
as called for by both meter and sense, and also the addition of a verb,  
*sta* or *ita*, at end of **c**, for a like reason. If, as seems very  
probable, the verse is originally addressed to kine, *kāmínīs* in **c**  
is quite natural; if not, we may regard *viśas* as understood: the sense  
is 'be your desires subject to his.' Ppp. has a different reading:  
*asmāi vaṣ kāmā upa kāminīr viśve devā upasatyām iha.* The comm. regards  
*kāminīs* as addressed throughout, and explains it finally as meaning  
*striyaḥ gāvaḥ* (perhaps the text is defective or incorrect; the general  
explanation of the verse implies *striyaḥ*). The comm. reads *puras* for  
*paras* in **a**, and in **b** divides *īryas*, deriving it from root  
*īr*, and rendering it *mārgaprerakas* ⌊*pada* has *íryas*⌋. The Anukr.  
calls for 11 + 11: 9 + 11 = 42 syllables, and strictly requires at the  
end *-i-antu;* but no inference as to a difference of reading is to be  
drawn from this. ⌊Ppp. combines in **b** *vājat.*—Weber says: "*asmāi*  
diesem, dem Hausherrn, *kāmāya* zu Liebe; oder gehört *asmāi* zu  
*kāmāya* selbst?"⌋
</details>

<details><summary>Griffith</summary>

Here, verily, may you stay: go ye no farther. The strong Herd, Lord of Increase, drive you hither! To please this man may all the Gods together come unto you and be as dames who love him.
</details>
