+++
title = "०१ अमुत्रभूयादधि यद्"

+++

<details><summary>Whitney</summary>

### Translation
1. When thou, O Brihaspati, didst release \[us\] from Yama's otherworld  
existence, from malediction, the Aśvins bore back death from us, O Agni,  
physicians of the gods, mightily.

### Notes
'Other-world existence,' lit. 'the being yonder.' The verse is VS.  
xxvii. 9, and is found also in TS. iv. 1. 7⁴, TA. x. 48 (Appendix), and  
MS. ii. 12. 5, the four texts nearly agreeing: they read *ádha* for  
*ádhi* in **a** (Ppp. appears to do the same); for **b**, *bṛ́haspate  
abhíśaster ámuñcaḥ;* in **c**, *asmā́t* for *asmát* (and MS. *ūhatām*).  
SPP. reads, for **b**, *bṛ́haspater abhíśaster amuñcaḥ;* the mss. are  
greatly at variance; half SPP's authorities read *bṛ́haspate*, which he  
ought accordingly to have adopted, since *bṛ́haspates* is ungrammatical,  
being neither one thing nor another; the comm., to be sure, has no  
scruple about taking it as a vocative: *he bṛhaspateḥ!* Our Bp. reads  
*bṛ́haspáteḥ;* P. has *-pate ‘bhi-*, which we followed in our text, but  
wrongly, as it is found in no other authority. For *ámuñcas* SPP. finds  
no authority; but it is given by our P.R.T., and, considering the  
necessity of the case, and the support of the other texts, that is  
enough. The pāda, then, should be made to agree with that of the  
parallel texts (changing our *‘bhí-* to *abhí-*). Ppp. has a different  
text, *bṛhaspatir abhiśastyā ’muñcat;* its **c**, also, is peculiar:  
*prati mṛtyum ahatām aśvinā te*. ⌊W. usually renders *abhíśasti* by  
'imprecation.'⌋
</details>

<details><summary>Griffith</summary>

As thou, Brihaspati, from the curse hast saved us, from dwel- ling yonder in the realm of Yama, The Asvins, leeches of the Gods, O Agni, have chased Death far from us with mighty powers.
</details>
