+++
title = "०१ प्र नभस्व"

+++

<details><summary>Whitney</summary>

### Translation
1. Burst forth, O earth; split this cloud of heaven; untie for us, O  
Dhātar, that art master, the skin-bag of the water of heaven.

### Notes
Ppp. reads, for **a**, *un nambhaya pṛthivīm*, which is better; it reads  
*bilam* for *dṛtim* at the end; also *udhno* at beginning of **c**; not  
a single ms. has the right reading of this word, either here or in the  
other places ⌊cf. iii. 12. 4, n.⌋ where it occurs; here they vary  
between *utnó* (the great majority, including all SPP's *pada*-mss.),  
*unnó, untó, utvó;* the comm. reads correctly *udnas*, and SPP. receives  
it into his text; our *ūdhnó* was a mistaken emendation. Our Bp. leaves  
*bhindhi* unaccented, putting after it the mark of pāda division, and  
several of the mss. (including our P.s.m.E.p.m.I.) accent in *saṁhitā*  
accordingly. The verse is found also in TS. (ii. 4. 8²) and MS. (i. 3.  
26); both have **a** like Ppp.; MS. has *adás* for *idám* in **b**; both  
read *udnó* in **c**, and TS. has *dehi* for *dhātar;* and, in **d**,  
TS. has *sṛjā* for *syā*. The comm. gives three independent explanations  
of *pra nabhasva:* either *prakarṣeṇa saṁgatā ucchvasitā bhava*, or  
*vṛṣtyā* (? mss. *kṛṣtyā, pṛṣtyā*) *prakarṣeṇa bādhitā mṛditā bhava*, or  
⌊*nabhasva* = *nahyasva*⌋ *saṁnaddhā bhava*. For *dhātar*, in **c**, he  
reads *dhāta* "= *dhehi*." The verse is really *anuṣṭubh* (resolving at  
the beginning *pṛ-á*). ⌊Play of words between *nabhasva* and *nabhas:*  
cf. iv. 7. 1.⌋ ⌊Correct *ūdhnó* to *udnó*.⌋
</details>

<details><summary>Griffith</summary>

Burst open, Prithvi, and cleave asunder this celestial cloud. Untie, O Dhatar--for thou canst--the bottle of the breast of heaven.
</details>
