+++
title = "४५ (५) ४५-४८"

+++

<details><summary>Whitney</summary>

### Translation
45. For him the dawn utters *hing;* Savitar preludes (*pra-stu*);  
Brihaspati with refreshment (*ūrjáyā*) sings the *udgīthá;* Tvashṭar  
with prosperity responds (*prati-hṛ*); all the gods \[are\] the  
conclusion (*nidhána*); the conclusion of thrift, of progeny, of cattle  
becometh he who knoweth thus.

### Notes
Here and in the following verses ⌊cf. PB. iv. 9. 9⌋ are had in view the  
five successive parts or divisions of a *sāman*, of which the *udgītha*  
is the central and principal: cf. Chānd. Upan. ii. 2 ff. In this section  
also the majority of the mss. divide and number in accordance with our  
edition; the rest, with the Anukr., number the subdivisions  
successively. Our edition assumes the subdivision *nidhánam bhū́tyāḥ* to  
be repeated at the end of each of the four paragraphs; the Anukr.  
⌊counting 10 (not 12) *avasānarcas:* cf. p. 546 below⌋ is against this;  
as for the mss., their testimony is nothing, since they all, in any  
case, write such an addition only the first time and the last, omitting  
all intermediate occurrences; it is altogether probable that the edition  
is right. The artificial description by the Anukr. of **b** as an  
*uṣṇih*, implies resolving *ūrjáyā úd*, and either *púṣṭi-ā* or  
*víśu-e*. Ppp. adds *vāi* after *tasmāi*, and *bhūtyā* after *savitā*,  
and reads *ūrjā* for *ūrjayā*.
</details>

<details><summary>Griffith</summary>

For him Dawn murmurs, and Savitar sings the prelude; Brihas- pati chants with vigour, and Tvashtar joins in with increase; the Visve Devah take up conclusion. He who hath this know- ledge is the abiding-place of welfare, of progeny, and of cattle.
</details>
