+++
title = "०७ एना व्याघ्रं"

+++

<details><summary>Whitney</summary>

### Translation
7. Thus, embracing the tiger, they incite (*hi*) the lion unto great  
good-fortune; as the well-being ones (*subhū́*) the ocean that stands, do  
they rub thoroughly down the leopard amid the waters.

### Notes
Found also in TB. (ii. 7. 16⁴) and MS. (ii. 1. 9: besides K.). In **b**,  
MS. has *mṛjanti* for *hinvanti*, and *dhánāya* (which rectifies the  
meter) for *sāúbhagāya*. For **c**, MS. has a much less unmanageable  
version, *mahiṣáṁ naḥ subhvàm*, and Ppp. supports it by giving *mahiṣaṁ  
nas subhavas:* thus, in each pāda the king is compared to a different  
powerful animal—which is the leading motive of the verse. But TB.  
differs from our text only by giving *suhávam*\* for *subhúvas*.  
*Subhvàm*, with a further slight emendation of *samudrám* to *-dré*,  
would give a greatly improved sense: "him who stands comfortable in the  
ocean, as it were," or bears himself well under the water poured upon  
him. The phrase *samudráṁ ná subhvàḥ* occurs also at RV. i. 52. 4 **b**  
(and its occurrence here in such form may be a reminiscence of that);  
Sāyaṇa there understands *subhvàs* of the "streams" that fill the ocean;  
and our comm. gives a corresponding interpretation here (*nadīrūpā  
āpaḥ*); *samudrám* he allows us alternatively to take as = *varuṇam*. He  
also, most ungrammatically, takes *enā́* at the beginning as ends "those  
\[waters\]." Ppp. further has *pari mṛjyante* for *marm-* in **d**.  
\*⌊Poona ed., p. 750, reads *suhúvam*.⌋
</details>

<details><summary>Griffith</summary>

These, compassing the tiger, rouse the lion to great joy and bliss. As strong floods purify the standing ocean, so men adorn the leopard in the waters
</details>
