+++
title = "०८ वाजस्य नु"

+++

<details><summary>Whitney</summary>

### Translation
8. In the impulse (*prasavá*) of vigor (? *vā́ja*) now have we come into  
being, and all these beings within. Both let him, foreknowing, cause him  
 to give who is unwilling to give, and do thou confirm to us wealth  
having all heroes.

### Notes
The verse seems to have no real connection with what precedes and  
follows, nor do its two halves belong together. They are in other texts,  
VS. (ix. 25 and 24) and TS. (in i. 7. 10¹), parts of two different  
verses, in a group of three, all beginning with *vā́jasya* followed by  
*prasavá*, and all alike of obscure and questionable interpretation, and  
belonging to the so-called *vājaprasavīyāni*, which form a principal  
element in the *vājapeya* sacrifice (see Weber's note on this verse  
⌊also his essay *Ueber den Vājapeya*, *Berliner Sb.*, 1892, p. 797⌋).  
Instead of *nú* in **a**, TS. and MS.K. (as above), as also Ppp., have  
the nearly equivalent *idám;* and all (save Ppp.) read *ā́ babhūvima*  
instead of *sáṁ babhūvima* at end of **a**, and *sarvátas* instead of  
*antár* at end of **b**, omitting the meter-disturbing *utá* at  
beginning of **c**; VS.K. read in **c** *dāpayati* for *-tu;* and all  
save K. give the preferable *yachatu* at the end (the comm. has  
*yacchāt*); then VS. gives *sá no rayím* in **d**, and K. has a peculiar  
**d**: *soma rayiṁ sahavīraṁ ni yaṁsat*. Ppp. is defective in parts of  
this verse and the next; it reads at the end of **c** *prajānāṁ*. Pāda  
**a** is the only one that has a *jagatī* character. ⌊TS. has  
*sárvavīrām*.⌋
</details>

<details><summary>Griffith</summary>

Now have we reached the ordering of power, and all these worlds of life are held within it. Let him who knows urge e'en the churl to bounty Give wealth. to us with all good men about us.
</details>
