+++
title = "०७ वी३दं मध्यमवासृपद्"

+++

<details><summary>Whitney</summary>

### Translation
7. The demon-slayer, disease-expeller, hath crept down over the middle  
here, expelling all diseases, making portents vanish from here.

### Notes
The change to masculine here in **b** is obscure and questionable;  
emendation to *-cā́tanam* is desirable; it would allow *idám* to be  
understood as 'this \[ointment\],' which is easier and more natural.  
Ppp., too, has *-cātanaṁ*, which gives the emendation sufficient  
support.\* Ppp. has for **a** *vīraṁ madhyam avāsṛjat*. The *pada*-mss.  
commit the egregious inconsistency of reading *cātáyan: nāśáyat* in **c,  
d**; SPP. emends in *pada*-text to *cātáyat*.\* Ppp. has in **d**  
*nāśayatam ivāhitā*. ⌊In **c** of the Berlin ed., correct *sárvaś* to  
*sárvāś*. \*⌊Both editions print *rakṣohā́mīvacā́tanaḥ*, and the  
*pada*-reading is *rakṣaḥ॰hā́:* *amīva॰cā́tanaḥ*. Whitney, doubtless by  
oversight, neglects to say how he would emend *rakṣohā́* to make a  
corresponding neuter of it, and the question is a very troublesome one  
(for details, see *Noun-Inflection*, p. 478 end, p. 479). The neuter  
form would properly be *-hắ;* but none such is quotable, so far as I  
know, unless here. May it be that we have here that very form, *-hắ*  
(neuter), concealed in the combination *-hā́mīva-*, and that the  
misunderstanding of it as *-hā́* (masculine.) *amīva-* led to a  
corruption of an original *-cā́tanam* into *-cā́tanaḥ* and also of an  
original *pada*-reading *cātáyat* into *cātáyan?* If so, all would be in  
harmony.⌋
</details>

<details><summary>Griffith</summary>

Now hath it gently crept within, fiend-slaying, chasing malady. And driving all diseases hence, and evil omens, banished them.
</details>
