+++
title = "०२ शं ते"

+++

<details><summary>Whitney</summary>

### Translation
2. Weal to thee be Agni, together with the waters; weal \[be\] Soma,  
together with the herbs: so from *kṣetriyá*, from perdition, etc. etc.

### Notes
The repetition (with *evā ’ham* prefixed) of the whole first verse as  
refrain for the following verses is not made by TB. and HGS. except  
after our vs. 8, and there only to *pā́śāt;* and in Ppp. it forms  
(complete) a part only of the same verse 8 (though this stands before  
our vs. 6). Its omission from vss. 2-7, and their combination into three  
whole 4-pāda verses ⌊and the omission of pādas **e** and **f** from vs.  
8⌋, would reduce the hymn to the norm of the second book, and is  
recommended not only by that circumstance, but by the ⌊wording in vss.  
2-3, the construction in vss. 4-5, the concurrent testimony of TB. and  
MP., and also of HGS. so far as it goes, and by the⌋ plain requirements  
of the sense also. ⌊Cf. the analogous state of things in iii. 31 and the  
note to iii. 31. 11.⌋ For **a, b** TB. HGS. substitute *śáṁ te agníḥ  
sahā́ ’dbhír astu śáṁ dyā́vāpṛthivī́ sahāú ’ṣadhībhiḥ;* and Ppp. differs  
from them by having *dhībhis* instead of *adbhís*, and *gāvas* for  
*dy...vī* (also *saho ’ṣa-*). The comm. reads *tvā* for *tvām* in vss.  
2-7 at the beginning of the refrain. This refrain is scanned by the  
Anukr. as 7 + 7 + 11: 11 + 11 = 47; and the addition in vs. 2 of 9 + 8  
makes 64 syllables, a true *aṣṭi;* but the other verses it is not  
possible to make agree precisely, in any natural way, with the metrical  
definitions given; 3-7 are of 69 syllables, 8 of 71. ⌊By beginning pādas  
**a** and **b** with (*śáṁ túbhyam*, and pronouncing both *sahá*'s with  
hiatus, and combining 2 **ab** with 3 **ab**, we get a perfectly regular  
*triṣṭubh.*⌋
</details>

<details><summary>Griffith</summary>

Gracious to thee be Agni with the Waters, let Soma with the Plants be kind and bless thee. From family sickness, kinsmen's curse, Destruction, from Druh, from Varuna's noose I thus release thee.
</details>
