+++
title = "०३ आयुषे त्वा"

+++

<details><summary>Whitney</summary>

### Translation
3. For life-time thee, for splendor thee, and for force and for  
strength—that with brilliancy of gold thou mayest shine out among the  
people.

### Notes
The comm. reads in **c** *hiraṇyaṁ tej-*. The comm. supplies in **a, b**  
*saṁ sṛjatu* to each noun, as if they were in the instrumental case,  
which is plainly wrong. Probably the 'thee' of the first line is  
different from the 'thou' of the second, being addressed to the article  
of gold itself.  
  
⌊The comm. (as noted) and the text of the comm. have *hiraṇyaṁ tejasā;*  
but all the other authorities are agreed as to the accentuation  
*hiraṇyatéjasā;* which, however, is inherently improbable (*Gram.* §1267  
b), if, with the *pada*-text, we take the combination as one compound  
word. Both mss. and comm. and accent all point the other way, and we  
have doubtless to assume as *pada*-reading *hiraṇya: téjasā*, as two  
words, of which the first is vocative; and, but for our blundering  
*pada-kāra*, this is just what our *saṁhitā*-reading would naturally be  
taken to mean. The comm. understands 'thee' as referring to the man who  
wears the gold amulet; but the whole verse gains in concinnity, if we  
refer 'thee' (with W.) to the amulet itself, and supply with the first  
half the verb *badhnāmi* (as at i. 35. 1 **c**; iv. 10. 7 **c**; xix.  
46. 1 **c, d**), and take the second half also as addressed to the  
amulet.⌋
</details>

<details><summary>Griffith</summary>

Long life and splendour let it bring energy and strength to thee. That thou mayst shine among the folk with all the brightness of the Gold.
</details>
