+++
title = "०१ स उदतिष्ठत्"

+++

<details><summary>Whitney</summary>

### Translation
1. **a.** ⌊1.⌋ He arose; he moved out (*vi-cal*) toward the eastern  
quarter; **b.** ⌊2.⌋ after him moved out both the *bṛhát* and the  
*rathaṁtará* and the Ādityas and all the gods; **c.** ⌊3.⌋ against both  
the *bṛhát* and the *rathaṁtará* and the Ādityas and all the gods doth  
he offend (*ā-vraśc*) who revileth a thus-knowing Vrātya; **d.** ⌊4.⌋ of  
both the *bṛhát* and the *rathaṁtará* and of the Ādityas and of all the  
gods doth he become the dear abode (*dhā́man*) \[who knoweth thus\]. Of  
him in the eastern quarter **e.** ⌊5.⌋ faith is the harlot, Mitra the  
*māgadhá* (bard?), discernment the garment, day the turban, night the  
hair, yellow the two *pravartás*, *kalmalí* the jewel (*maṇí*), **f.**  
⌊6.⌋ both what is and what is to be the two footmen (*pariṣkandá*), mind  
the rough vehicle (*vipathá*), **g.** ⌊7.⌋ Mātariśvan and Pavamāna (the  
'cleansing' wind) the two drawers (*-vāhá*) of the rough vehicle, the  
wind the charioteer, the whirlwind the goad, **h.** ⌊8.⌋ both fame and  
glory the two forerunners: to him cometh fame, cometh glory, who knoweth  
thus.

### Notes
The natural division of the matter of this and the following verses is  
in the latter half strangely violated by the tradition. Division **d**  
should most certainly have at its end *yá eváṁ véda*, as is shown by the  
requirements of the sense and by the occurrence of these words in the  
same connection in 6. 1-9, 8. 3, and 9. 3; but the phrase is wanting in  
all the mss.; we have introduced it in our text, and the translation  
gives it (in brackets). Then the mss. most senselessly reckon to **d**  
the words which really introduce **e-h**, or the second half of the  
verse; i.e., they set no *avasāna* before *tásya*, but have one after  
*diśí;* and the Anukr. follows the same method; it is corrected in our  
text ⌊although the division by letters in the translation follows the  
mss.⌋; the analogy of the verses of hymns 4 and 5 is a sufficient  
justification for so doing. In the second half, the only natural  
division is after *puraḥsarāú;* very strangely, however, the mss. and  
Anukr. set no *avasāna* here, but one, altogether out of place, after  
*pratodás*, and two that are uncalled for after *maṇís* and *vipathám*  
respectively; of these two we have retained only that after *maṇís* (as  
it denoted a certain change of subject), while we have shifted forward  
to its proper place the one after *pratodás*. The metrical definitions  
of the Anukr. are evidently applicable, with the usual degree of  
exactness, to the divisions as made by the mss.  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
The translation follows the mss. in reading in **e** *mitró* (but all  
save Bs.s.m.D.R. accent *mítro*) *māgadhó*. ⌊Correct the Berlin ed. from  
*mántro* to *mitró*.⌋ The Pet. Lex. conjectures *pravarta* to signify a  
rounded ornament. ⌊As for turban, goad, etc., see p. 770, ¶ 2.⌋ ⌊Ppp.  
has *sa prācīṁ diśam anuvyacalat;* the remainder of the book is  
wanting.⌋
</details>

<details><summary>Griffith</summary>

He arose and went his way to the eastern region. The Brihat, the Rathantara, the Adityas and all the Gods followed him. That man is alienated from the Brihat, the Rathantara, the Adityas, and all Gods who reviles the Vratya who possesses this knowledge. He who hath this knowledge becomes the beloved home of the Brihat, the Rathantara the Adityas, and all the Gods. In the eastern region Faith is his leman, the hymn his panegyrist, knowledge his vesture, day his turban, night his hair, Indra's two Bays his circular ornaments, the splendour of the stars his jewel. Present and Future are his running footmen, mind is his war-chariot, Matarisvan and Pavamana are they who draw it, Vita is his charioteer, Storm his goad, Fame and Glory are his harbingers. Fame and Glory come to him who hath this knowledge.
</details>
