+++
title = "०४ सुगा वो"

+++

<details><summary>Whitney</summary>

### Translation
4. We have made for you easily accessible seats, O gods, ye that have  
come enjoying me at the libation; carrying, bearing \[your\] own good  
things, ascend ye to heaven after the good hot drink (?).

### Notes
TS. (as above) reads at the beginning *svagā́*, and later in **a**  
*sádanam*, MS. *sádanā kṛṇomi;* in **b**, VS. MS. have *-gmé ’dáṁ  
sávanaṁ juṣ-*, TS. *sávane ’dáṁ j-*; Ppp. also has *kṛṇomi*, followed by  
the unintelligible *yā caṣṭe ’daṁ savane juṣāṇāḥ;* the AV. text (p.  
*sávane: mā*) is apparently a corruption of *sávane ’mā́*, which the  
comm. reads. In **c**, VS. inverts the order of the two participles, and  
all read *havī́ṅṣi* for *svā́ vásūni;* in **d**, VS. MS. have *ásum* for  
*vásum*, and VS. *svàr* for *dívam*, and all *tiṣṭhata* for *rohata*.  
Ppp. gives, for **c, d**, *v. bh. dudhās tvaṁ gharmaṁ tam u tiṣṭhatā  
’nu*. All the AV. *pada*-mss. (except a single one of SPP's) read  
*váhamānā: bháramāṇā*, without final *visarga*, and all the  
*saṁhitā*-mss. (except our P.p.m.) have *-ṇā svā́;* both printed texts  
make the necessary emendation in *saṁhitā* to *-ṇāḥ svā́* (which the  
comm. also reads), and SPP. adds the *visarga* to both p'ples in his  
*pada*-text. The *pada* reading in **a** is *sádanā: akarma* (our Bp.  
*-nāḥ* s. m.), and the irregular hiatus must be regarded as falling  
under Prāt. iii. 34, although the passage is not quoted by the  
commentary to that rule; SPP. takes no notice of the anomaly. The comm.  
explains *gharmám* in **d** by *ādityam*. The Anukr. passes without  
notice the redundancy of **c**, due to the apparently intruded *svā*.
</details>

<details><summary>Griffith</summary>

Gods, we have made your seats of easy access, who, pleased with me, have come to my libation. Bearing and bringing hitherward your treasures, after the rich warm beverage mount to heaven.
</details>
