+++
title = "२४ एतं वो"

+++

<details><summary>Whitney</summary>

### Translation
24. This young male we set toward you here; with him go ye (fem.)  
playing according to your wills; abandon us not with birth, ye  
wellportioned ones; and with abundances of wealth attach yourselves to  
us.

### Notes
The last pāda is the same with xviii. 4. 62 **d**. The verse is found,  
in much more acceptable form, in TS. (iii. 3. 9¹, followed, after one  
intervening verse, by our vss. 5, 4 above) and PGS. (iii. 9. 6,  
disagreeing with TS. in only one word); they read, for **a**, *etáṁ  
yúvānam pári* (but PGS. *patiṁ*) *vo dadāmi* (omitting *atra*); in  
**b**, *priyéṇa* for *váśāṅ ánu;* in **c**, *śāpta* for *hāsiṣṭa;* and,  
for **d**, *rāyás póṣeṇa sám iṣā́ madema* (nearly our iii. 15. 8 **c**).  
Ppp. agrees with our text, only combining *dadhmo ‘tra* in **a**. But  
for the accent of *janúṣā* (in TS. also), we might render, with  
Stenzler, 'ye who are by birth well-portioned.' Bp.R.p.m. have at end of  
**c** *subhagās*. The Anukr. weakly calls the verse (12 + 12: 11 + 11) a  
*jagatī*, in spite of the *triṣṭubh* cadence of its first pāda. It is  
quoted in Kāuś. 24. 21, to accompany the sending away of an older bull  
and the release of a new one. ⌊See also note to Kāuś. 25. 24.⌋  
  
⌊Here ends the second *anuvāka* with 2 hymns and 55 verses. The quoted  
Anukr. says "*sāhasre*"⌋
</details>

<details><summary>Griffith</summary>

ए॒तं वो॒ युवा॑नं॒ प्रति॑ दध्मो॒ अत्र॒ तेन॒ क्रीड॑न्तीश्चरत॒ वशाँ॒ अनु॑ ।  
मा नो॑ हासिष्ट ज॒नुषा॑ सुभागा रा॒यश्च॒ पोषै॑र॒भि नः॑ सचध्वम्॥२४॥
</details>
