+++
title = "०२ इयं पित्र्या"

+++

<details><summary>Whitney</summary>

### Translation
2. Let this queen of the Fathers (? *pítrya*) go in the beginning  
(*ágre*) for the first birth (*janús;* race?), standing in the creation;  
for it (him?) have I sent (*hi*) this well-shining sinuous one (?  
*hvārá*); let them mix (*śrī;* boil?) the hot drink for the first  
thirsty one (? *dhāsyú*).

### Notes
The connection of the pādas is here yet more obscure than their separate  
interpretation; the third pāda may perhaps signify the lightning. The  
verse, with variants, is found in śśS. (v. 9. 6) and AśS. (iv. 6. 3),  
and its pratīka in AB. (1. 19) and GB. (ii. 2. 6); the first three read  
in **a** *pitre* for *pitryā* and *eti* for *etu*, and AB. inserts *vāi*  
after *iyam;* and Ppp. also has *pitre*. In **b** the two Sūtra-texts  
give *bhūmaneṣṭhāḥ*, which is perhaps intended by the *bhūminaṣṭāu* of  
Ppp.; in **d**, the same two have *śrīṇantī prathamasya dhāseḥ*, and  
Ppp. *-ntu prathamas svadhāsyuḥ*. The comm. takes *pitryā* to mean "come  
from Prajāpati"; "the queen" is the divinity of speech—or else "this  
earth," *pitryā* relating to its father Kaśyapa; *dhāsyu* is the god  
desiring food in the form of oblation, and *surucam hvãram* is *suṣṭhu  
rocamānaṁ kuṭilaṁ vartamānam*, qualifying *gharmam; ahyam* is an  
adjective, either *gantavyam*, from the root *ah* 'go,' or "daily," from  
*ahan* 'day'! and *śrī* is either "mix" or "boil."
</details>

<details><summary>Griffith</summary>

Let this Queen come in front, her Father's daughter, found in the worlds for earliest generation. For him they set this radiant vault in motion. Let them prepare warm milk for him who first would drink.
</details>
