+++
title = "०५ स बुध्न्यादाष्ट्र"

+++

<details><summary>Whitney</summary>

### Translation
5. He from the fundamental birth (*janús*) hath attained (*aś*) unto  
(*abhi*) the summit; Brihaspati, the universal ruler, \[is\] the  
divinity of him; since the bright (*śukrá*) day was born of light, then  
let the shining (*dyumánt*) seers (*vípra*) fade out (? *vi-vas*) ⌊shine  
out?⌋.

### Notes
⌊Whitney's prior draft reads "dwell apart." This he has changed (by a  
slip? cf. ii. 8. 2) to "fade out," from *vas* 'shine.' In this case *ví  
vasantu* would be irregular, for *ví uchantu;* see Weber's note, p. 7.⌋  
The other two texts (see preceding note) read our **a** thus: *sá  
budhnā́d āṣṭa janúṣā ’bhy ágram*, and TS. has *yásya* instead of *tásya*  
in the next pāda; no variants are reported from Ppp. Some of the AV.  
mss. also (including our P.M.W.I.K.Kp.) give *budhnā́d;* but all have  
after it the impossible form *āṣṭra*, which SPP. accordingly retains in  
his text, though the comm. too gives *āṣṭa;* this is read by emendation  
in our text. *Vasantu*, of course, might come from *vas* 'dwell' or  
*vas* 'clothe' ⌊for *vas-atām?!*⌋; the comm. apparently takes it from  
the former, paraphrasing the pāda by *dīptimanta ṛtvijaḥ svasvavyāpāreṣu  
vividhaṁ vartantām*, or, alternatively, *havirbhir devān paricarantu*.  
There is no reason for calling the verse *bhurij*. ⌊AśS. reads *ugnam*  
(misprint?) for *agrám*.⌋
</details>

<details><summary>Griffith</summary>

He from the depth hath been reborn for ever, Brihaspati the world's sole Lord and Ruler. From light was born the Day with all its lustre: through this let sages live endowed with splendour.
</details>
