+++
title = "०४ पक्षी जायान्यः"

+++

<details><summary>Whitney</summary>

### Translation
4. Having wings, the *jāyánya* flies; it enters into a man; this is the  
remedy of both, of the *ákṣita* and of the *súkṣata*.

### Notes
Ppp. has in **b** *yā viśati* (i.e. *ya ā v-*) *pāu-*, and lacks **c,  
d**. The meaning of the words *ákṣita* and *súkṣata* is very doubtful  
and much disputed. They seem most likely to be two kinds of *jāyānya*,  
as the intrusion of any other ⌊malady⌋ here would be very harsh. Yet it  
is also much to be questioned whether the two half-verses belong  
together. Their discordance of form is strange: one would expect an  
antithesis of *akṣita* and *sukṣita*, or else of *akṣata* and *sukṣata*.  
In fact, the comm. reads *sukṣita*, and explains the two as meaning  
respectively *śarīre cirakālāvasthānarahitasya* and *cirakālam  
avasthitasya*, or, alternatively, as *ahiṅsakasya śarīram aśoṣayataḥ*  
and *śarīragatasarvadhātūn suṣṭhu niḥśeṣaṁ śoṣayataḥ*. Ludwig's  
translation accords with the former of these two explanations. Zimmer  
and Bloomfield, on the other hand, would emend to *akṣatasya*,  
Bloomfield quoting for *akṣata* from both the Kāuśika and its commentary  
and from the later Hindu medicine; his rendering, however, 'not caused  
by cutting' and 'sharply cut,' is unacceptable, since *kṣan* does not  
mean distinctively 'cut,' but more nearly 'bruise.' There is no  
variation of reading in the mss. as regards the two words; and it seems  
extremely unlikely that, if they once agreed, they should have become  
thus dissimilated.
</details>

<details><summary>Griffith</summary>

Scrofula flies borne on by wings: it penerates and holds the man. Here is the cure of either kind, the chronic and the transient.
</details>
