+++
title = "०३ धरुण्यऽसि शाले"

+++

<details><summary>Whitney</summary>

### Translation
3. A garner (? *dharunī́*) art thou, O dwelling, of great roof, of  
cleansed grain; to thee may the calf come, may the boy, may the kine,  
streaming in at evening.

### Notes
This translation of the difficult and doubtless corrupt first half-verse  
implies emendation of *-chandas* to *-chadis*, and of *pū́ti-* to  
*pūtá-*—which latter is, in fact, the Ppp. reading. In **d**, SPP.  
adopts the bad reading *āspándamānās*, claiming to find it in the  
majority of his mss.; but the scribes are so wholly untrustworthy in  
their distinction of *sy* and *sp* that the requirement of the sense is  
sufficient to show that they intend *sy* here; the comm. reads  
*-syand-*, and so does śGS. (iii. 2) in the parallel passage: *enāṁ  
śiśuḥ krandaty ā kumāra ā syandantāṁ dhenavo nityavatsāḥ;* PGS. (ibid.)  
has *ā tvā śiśur ā krandatv ā gāvo dhenavo vāśyamānāḥ.* ⌊MGS. ii. 11. 12  
^(b) reflects our vs. 7.⌋ The comm. lets us understand by *dharuṇī́*  
either *bhogajātasya dhārayitrī* or *praśastāi stambhāir upetā;* and by  
*bṛhachandās* either *prabhūtāchādanā* or *mahadbhiś chandobhir vedāir  
upetā;* *pūtidhānya* is "having corn malodorous from age"—a sign of  
stores unexhausted. The Anukr. apparently scans as 7 + 8: 10 + 11 = 36:  
a very poor sort of *bṛhatī.* ⌊Note that of SPP's authorities for  
*āsyand-*, K and V were men, not mss.; none of his living authorities  
gave *āspand-*. The blunder is easy for the eye, not for the ear.⌋
</details>

<details><summary>Griffith</summary>

A spacious store, O House, art thou, full of clean corn and lofty-roofed. Let the young calf and little boy approach thee, and milch-kine streaming homeward in the evening.
</details>
