+++
title = "१७ अघोरचक्षुर् अपतिघ्नी"

+++

<details><summary>Whitney</summary>

### Translation
17. With an eye not terrible, not husband-slaying, pleasant, helpful  
(*śagmá*), very propitious, of easy control (*suyáma*) for the houses,  
hero-bearing, loving brothers-in-law (?), with favoring mind—may we  
thrive together with thee.

### Notes
The concluding word is here rendered as the text gives it, but there is  
little question that it ought to be emended (with Ppp.) to *-mānāḥ*, as  
qualifying 'we.' This verse and the next are a sort of duplication and  
variation of RV. x. 85. 44; our **a** here is nearly the same with the  
first pāda of that verse, which, however, reads *edhi* for our *syonā*.  
Ppp. makes our 17 **c, d** and 18 **c, d** change places, reading for  
the former *vīrasūr devakāmā syonāṁ tvedhiṣīmahi sumanasyamānāḥ*. Our  
mss. are divided in **c** between *devṛ́kāmā* and *devák-*, the majority  
(not Bp.Bs.p.m.E.O.D.) having, with RV. and Ppp., the latter, which is  
therefore more probably the true reading. Ppp. has in **a** (like RV.)  
*edhi* but with *syonā* after it ⌊a "blend-reading" such as the Vulgate  
shows at vs. 18?⌋; and, in **b**, *sūyamā gṛheṣu*. ⌊Cf. MP. i. 1. 4;  
MGS. i. 10. 6, and p. 146.⌋ The verse accompanies in Kāuś. 77. 22 the  
leading of the bride thrice about the fire. PCS. i. 4. 16 and HGS. i.  
20.2 have it in its RV. form, with slight variants in HGS. Our verse (11  
+ 11: 7 + 13 = 42) is metrically much too irregular to be set down as  
simply a *triṣṭubh*.
</details>

<details><summary>Griffith</summary>

Not evil-eyed no slayer of thy husband, be strong, mild, kind, and gentle to thy household. Mother of heroes, love thy husband's father: be happy, and through thee may we too prosper.
</details>
