+++
title = "५९ यदीमे केशिनो"

+++

<details><summary>Whitney</summary>

### Translation
59. If these hairy people have danced together in thy house, doing evil  
with wailing—from that sin let Agni and Savitar release thee.

### Notes
This and the three following verses are discussed by Bloomfield in AJP.  
xi. 336 ff. ⌊or JAOS. xv., p. xliv. = PAOS. for Oct. 1890⌋. They  
evidently have no connection originally with marriage ceremonies, but  
rather with wailings for the dead, which are regarded as ill-omened and  
requiring expiation.\* ⌊Cf. the following verses.⌋ Kāuś. quotes only  
this one (79. 30), and for no definite purpose, combining it with 1. 46  
(see note to the latter). Ppp. reads in **a** *yad amī* for *yadī ’me*,  
and in **c** *kṛṇvatīs*. The false accent *kṛṇvantás* (which our edition  
has not corrected) is read by all our mss. save one (D.).  
  
⌊The case is nearly the same with the authorities of SPP., who says,  
"This reading \[*kṛṇvantó*\] appears ancient, traditional, and general."  
A note in my copy of AV. suggests that the blunder may have crept in  
from vs. 61; and I find my surmise confirmed not only by SPP. (who,  
however, attributes the wrong accent and *kampa* to vs. 60; see his  
note), but also by the fact of similar occurrences elsewhere: cf., for  
example, the curious *avagraha* of *sám॰jñapayāmi* at vi. 74. 2 (and my  
note); the impossible *ví॰bhāti* at xiii. 3. 17, and note; etc.⌋  
  
\*⌊Cf. Francis James Child, *The English and Scottish Popular Ballads*,  
part x., p. 498, under the heading "Tears destroy the peace of the  
dead," and the citation from MBh. xi. 1. 42-43 given on p. 294 of the  
same part: "For they \[the tears\], like sparks, 'tis said, do burn  
those men \[for whom they're shed\]."⌋ ⌊See Lüders, ZDMG. lviii. 507.⌋
</details>

<details><summary>Griffith</summary>

If, wearing long loose hair, these men have danced together in thy house, committing sin with shout and cry, May Agni free thee from that guilt, may Savitar deliver thee,
</details>
