+++
title = "०१ अचिक्रदत् स्वपा"

+++

<details><summary>Whitney</summary>

### Translation
1. He hath shouted (? *krand*); may he be protector of his own here; O  
Agni, bend apart the two widened firmaments (*ródasī*); let the  
all-possessing Maruts harness (*yuj*) thee; lead thou hither with homage  
yon man of bestowed oblation.

### Notes
This is a very literal translation of the obscure verse, which is  
plainly an adaptation or corruption, or both, of a RV. verse in a hymn  
to Agni (vi. 11. 4: it is repeated, without variant, in MS. iv. 14. 15):  
*ádidyutat sv ápāko vibhā́va ’gne yájasva ródasī urūcī́: āyúṁ ná yáṁ  
námasā rātáhavyā añjánti suprayásam páñca jánāḥ;* and, what is very  
noteworthy, the latter half-verse of RV. is decidedly more closely  
reflected in the Ppp. version: *amuṁ naya namasā rātahavyo yujanti  
suprajasaṁ pañca janāḥ;* Ppp. has also *bhavat* at end of **a**. It  
could not be expected to find concinnity and sense in a verse so  
originated; the address seems to be changed from Agni to Indra, and some  
sort of comparison aimed at between the latter and the reinstated king.  
The *pada*-text divides in a *sva॰pā́ḥ*, and, as the word may be a part  
of the adaptation ⌊of the original to the purpose of this hymn⌋, the  
translation so treats it, instead of substituting, as Weber and Ludwig  
do, *su॰apā́ḥ;* the comm. explains it both ways: *svakīyānām prajānām  
pālakaḥ sukarmā vā.* The comm. makes the king subject of *ácikradat* in  
**a**, apparently takes *vyàcasva* in **b** as one word (= *vyāpnuhi*),  
*tvā* in **c** as designating Agni (*yuñjantu* = *prāpnuvantu,  
tvatsahāyā bhavantu*), and *amúm* in **d** as the king. The Anukr.  
ignores the *jagatī* pāda (**c**) ⌊or lets it offset **a** counted as  
10!⌋ ⌊The usual compound is *sv-ápās;* but *sv-apā́s*, though not  
quotable, is quite possible.⌋
</details>

<details><summary>Griffith</summary>

Loudly he roared. Here let him labour deftly. Spread, Agni, over spacious earth and heaven. Let Maruts who possesses all treasures yoke thee. Bring him who reverently paid oblations.
</details>
