+++
title = "०३ उदप्रुतो मरुतस्ताम्"

+++

<details><summary>Whitney</summary>

### Translation
3. Water-swimming \[are\] the Maruts; send ye that rain which shall fill  
all the hollows; the *gláhā* shall bestir itself, like a girl that is  
thrust, thrusting the *éru*, like wife with husband.

### Notes
The text of this verse is hopelessly corrupt, and all attempts to make  
connected sense of the second half must apparently be (like that of  
Pischel in *Ved. Stud.* i. 81 ff.) forced and unsuccessful. ⌊Baunack,  
KZ. xxxv. 532, may also be consulted.⌋ The version of it presented in  
TS. (iii. 1. 11⁸) rather sets off its difficulties than gives any help  
in solving them. It makes *marutas* vocative in **a**, and the comm.  
also understands the word as vocative, not heeding its accent; the  
preferable reading would be *údapruto marutas*, both vocative. The comm.  
then takes *tā́n* together with *udaprútas* as qualifying *meghān*  
'clouds' understood. Ppp., with the majority of SPP's authorities and  
some of ours (P.M.), reads *udaplútas*. Then *tā́ṅ* (*pada*-text *tā́n*)  
is read by all the authorities in both texts, although the sense  
necessarily requires (as in our translation is assumed) *tā́m*, as  
antecedent to *yā́*. But here, again, all the *pada*-texts have *yā́ḥ*,  
which completes their confusion. TS. has, for **b**, the wholly  
different and doubtless secondary phrase *vṛ́ṣṭiṁ yé víśve marúto  
junánti*, making of the line 'O Maruts, send those water-swimming ones  
who, \[namely\] all the Maruts, hasten the rain.' The comm. understands  
*yā*, but then also *víśvā*, as neut. pl. (*vrīhiyavādisasyāni*), while  
all our *pada*-texts have correctly *víśvāḥ;* the comm. then is obliged  
to supply a *ca* 'and' after *nivátas*. In **c, d**, TS. reads *króśāti*  
for *éjāti*, *gárdā* for *gláhā*, *pérum* for *érum*, and *tuñjānā́* for  
*tundānā́* (some of the mss., including our O.D.R., have *tudānā́*); the  
comm. also has *tuñjānā*, but *gahlā* (so printed; but it should  
doubtless be *galhā*, since he derives it from root *garh* 'chide': one  
of our mss. (W.) and three of SPP's have *gálhā*) instead of *gláhā* or  
*gárdā;* he translates it 'thunder.' These changes on *gláhā* and *éru*,  
at least, are plainly no real variations of reading, but blind blunders  
over an unintelligible text. Ppp. is corrupt and hardly legible: perhaps  
*ye jahāti ktahnā kanye ’va dunnonaṁ dunnāmā patye ‘va jāyām*. R.  
suggests that the line **c-d** belongs to a gambling hymn, and that we  
are to read *glahas* and *ūrum*, a comparison being made between the  
shaking of the dice-holder and the agitatio of a female at the *coitus*.
</details>

<details><summary>Griffith</summary>

O Maruts, send ye down, streaming with water rain which, may, filling all the sloping valleys, Leap like a bold girl in a man's embraces, or like a matron tumbled by her husband.
</details>
