+++
title = "०६ रक्षा माकिर्नो"

+++

<details><summary>Whitney</summary>

### Translation
6. Let no demon, \[no\] mischief-plotter master us; let no evil-plotter  
master us; let no thief today master our kine, nor a wolf our sheep;—

### Notes
The mss. have at the beginning *rákṣā* (p. *rákṣa*), as 2d sing,  
imperative, and pāda **d** of RV. vi. 71. 3 (the verse is found also in  
VS. ⌊xxxiii. 69⌋ TS. ⌊i. 4. 24¹⌋ TB. ⌊ii.4. 4⁷⌋ MS. ⌊i. 3. 27⌋) gives  
the same, ⌊as does RV. vi. 75. 10 **d**⌋. The translation follows our  
conjectured emendation, which, in view of the implausibility of the  
impv. *rákṣa* standing so alone, has a right to consideration. Ppp.  
reads *mākir ṇo a-*. The comm. reckons our 6 **a, b** as a whole verse  
⌊his 6⌋; our 6 **c, d** and 7 **a, b** as his vs. 7; our 7 **c, d** and  
8 **a, b** as his vs. 8; our 8 **c, d** and 9 **a, b** as his vs. 9; and  
our 9 **c, d** and 10 as his vs. 10; thus making the sixth verse instead  
of the tenth to consist of two padas only, while yet counting ten verses  
in the hymn. SPP., on the other hand ⌊see his Critical Notice in vol.  
i., p. 24⌋, counts vs. 6 as our edition does, but adds our 8 **a, b** to  
our vs. 7 to form his vs. 7, thus making it of six pādas; and then  
counts our 8 **c, d** and 9 **a, b** as his vs. 8, and our 9 **c, d**  
and 10 as his vs. 9. This is in accordance with the Anukr. ⌊in that it  
gives six pādas to vs. 7 and makes a total of 9 vss.⌋, and is a  
decidedly preferable division to that in our text, which was founded on  
the numbering of our first mss., and it will be followed in translating  
here. The sense, however, would be still better suited by making vs. 6  
of three lines, instead of vs. 7. ⌊In what follows, I give first the  
numeration of the Berlin edition, and then, in parenthesis, SPP's  
numeration.⌋  
  
  
  
  
  
  
    
7, 8 **a, b.** (7.) Nor a robber our horses, O excellent one; nor the  
sorceresses our men.  
  
  
By the most distant roads let the thief, the robber, run; by a distant  
one let the toothed rope, by a distant one let the malignant hasten  
(*ṛṣ*).  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
As to the division, see under the preceding verse. In the fourth pāda,  
part of the mss. accent *taskarás*. In the first, there is discordance  
among them as to the accent of *bhadre*. The 'rope with teeth' is of  
course the snake, as the comm. also has sense to see (*rajjuvad āyataḥ  
sarpādiḥ*). Our 8 **a, b** is identical with iv. 3. 2 **c, d**; and our  
7 **c, d** resembles **a, b** of the same verse. ⌊For *yātudhānyàs* the  
comm. reads the masculine, *-nās*.⌋
</details>

<details><summary>Griffith</summary>

Let not a fiends or spiteful man, let no ill-wisher master us. Let not the robber seize our cows, nor the wolf take our sheep today.
</details>
