+++
title = "०८ अध रात्रि"

+++

<details><summary>Whitney</summary>

### Translation
8 **c, d**, 9 **a, b.** (8.) Do thou, O night, make the snake blind,  
harsh-smoked (?), headless; grind up the two jaws of the wolf; cast  
(*ā-han*) the thief into the snare.

### Notes
⌊Apart from the variation in **c**, the verse is identical with 50. 1,  
below: see note thereon.⌋ All the mss. (except, by accident, one of  
SPP's) at the beginning have *ándha;* SPP. reads *ádha*, with one ms.  
and the comm.; but *ádha* is plainly out of place, and *andham*, as  
emended in our text (it should have been accented *andhám;* ⌊correct the  
misprint⌋), a very plausible correction. Our rendering of *tṛṣṭadhūma*  
is mechanically accurate; probably the word is corrupt; Ppp. reads the  
pāda *andho rātri tiṣṭadhūmam*. The comm. explains as *ārtikārī dhūmo  
viṣajvālādhūmo ni-* (ms. *vi-*) *śvāsadhūmo vā yasya;* the translators  
understand *-dhūma* as "breath" or "odor"; ⌊Griffith renders 'with  
pungent breath'⌋. In **c, d** the mss. have *jambháyāsthéna táṁ drupadé  
jahi* (but many of them have *-bhā́-*). SPP. follows them and prints  
*jambháyās téna táṁ dr-*: from this our text makes a bold departure\*  
⌊implying as its *pada*-reading *jambhaya: ā́: stenám: drupadé: jahi*⌋;  
but something had to be done to make sense; any one is invited to do  
better if he can. The comm. reads with the mss., and forces through a  
meaningless version. Ppp. has a different and corrupt text: *hano  
vṛkasya jambhayādvāinaṁ nṛpate jahi* ⌊cf. end of note to 50. 1⌋.  
  
\*⌊The assumption of an *ā́* (*ā́...jahi*) after *jambhaya* is supported  
by *nírjahyāsténa...jahi* at 50. 1 **c, d**, below, where the  
collocation is almost unequivocal (see the note); for although *jahyās*  
(as given by the *pada*-mss.) is a good optative of *hā*, the  
combination of *hā* with *nis* is hardly Vedic, and we must there assume  
the division *nir jahy ā ste-*, the locative *drupadé* fitting well with  
*ā jahi* (cf. i. 11. 4; x. 8. 4 **c**). The rationale of the corruption  
here is not hard to see: the hiatus between **c** and **d** being once  
covered by the fusion of the final of *jambhaya* with the *ā́* of *ā́  
stenám*, nothing was easier than to see a form *jambhayās* in the first  
part of the combination, and then to substitute *téna* for the vastly  
less common *stenám* or for the meaningless *tenám* (which might be read  
out of the combination: see Prāt. ii. 40 note); the exigency of the  
meter occasioned by the blunder with *jambhayās* then made the insertion  
of *tám* easy. With the Berlin solution of the corruption, the meter is  
in perfect order. The interesting parallel from the Avesta, *hām zanva  
zembayadhwem*, Yasht i. 27, adduced by Geldner, KZ. xxx. 514, may here  
be noted.⌋
</details>

<details><summary>Griffith</summary>

Far from us let Rope with Fangs, far from us let the wicked flee. Do thou make blind and headless. Night, the serpent with his pungent breath.
</details>
