+++
title = "०८ शं नो"

+++

<details><summary>Whitney</summary>

### Translation
8. Weal for us be the quaking (*vip*) earth, and weal what is  
meteor-smitten; weal be the red-milked kine, weal the earth when  
cleaving down.

### Notes
All the mss. accent *vepyamāná* in **a**, and nearly all (including the  
*pada*-mss.) end it as a nom. pl. *-mānā́ḥ;* SPP. emends by dropping the  
blundering *visarga*, but does not venture to alter the equally  
blundering accent; of course, it must be made *vepyámānā*, as pres.  
pass, pple of the causative, unless we emend further to *vépamānā*, as  
our text reads, and as is decidedly better. The comm. reads *vepyamānā*,  
and explains it once by *kampamānā* and once by *kampyamānā*. ⌊Most⌋  
mss., and SPP., read in **b** *ulkā́ nírh-*; ⌊but Whitney's I. and three  
of SPP's authorities give *ni-* for *nir-*⌋; the comm. ⌊reads *-ni-*  
and⌋ understands the two words to form a compound, as it is made to be  
in our text by simply removing the accent of *-nir-*; one does not see  
the applicability of the prefix *nis-*. In **c**, some of the mss. read  
*lóhitaḥ*, and some accent *kṣīrā́ḥ;* 'red-milked' would be with equal  
propriety rendered 'bloody-milked'; and the two things are of course  
equivalent. In **d**, the comm. has *avadīryatī*, glossing it with  
*avadīryamāṇā*, and this reading has been gratefully adopted in the  
translation. All the mss. give *ávatīryatī́s*, and all the *pada*-mss.  
divide it *ávatīḥ: yatī́ḥ;* SPP. emends to *áva tīryatī́ḥ*, by which  
nothing at all is gained; we emended to *avatī́ryatī*, which is at least  
grammatical, though hardly intelligible; *avadīryatī* is both; ⌊one of  
SPP's reciters gives *áva dīryatī́*⌋.
</details>

<details><summary>Griffith</summary>

Gracious to us be trembling earth, gracious the flaming meteor stroke! Gracious be kine who yield red milk, gracious be earth when sinking down!
</details>
