+++
title = "१४ पृथिवी शान्तिरन्तरिक्षम्"

+++

<details><summary>Whitney</summary>

### Translation
14. \[Be\] earth appeasement, atmosphere appeasement, sky appeasement,  
waters appeasement, herbs appeasement, forest trees appeasement; \[be\]  
all the gods appeasement for me, the gods all appeasement for me,  
appeasement with appeasements; by those appeasements all-appeasing do I  
appease what here is terrible, what here is cruel, what here is evil;  
\[be\] that appeased, \[be\] that propitious; be just everything weal  
for us.

### Notes
With a large minority of his authorities, and with the comm., SPP. adds  
one more *śā́ntiḥ* before *śā́ntibhis* at the end of the first division;  
in the second division, he follows the mss. slavishly in reading *sárva  
śā́ntibhiḥ;* the comm. apparently (it is defective here) agrees with our  
emendation to *sarvaśāntibhis*. After this word, the mss. all have  
*śamayāmoham*, accenting either *śámayā́mohám* or *śámayāmohám;* the  
*pada*-mss. divide it absurdly *śámaya: mohám;* the comm. understands it  
as *śamayāmo ‘ham*, with substitution of *aham* for *vayam* by Vedic  
license (a mere exchange of plural and singular); SPP. unaccountably  
gives *śámayāmohám* with the *pada*-text *śám: ayāmaḥ: akám;* our  
emendation to *śamayāmy ahám* is evidently necessary. Similar passages  
occur in VS. xxxvi. 17; TA. iv. 42 (28); MS. iv. 9. 27 ⌊p. 138¹²⌋; but  
it is not worth while to quote them in detail; TA. (29) contains the  
compound *sarvaśāntí* and MS. has *sárvaśānti*. The "verse" is the only  
one in the whole work that is called a *saṁkṛti* (96 syllables); it  
counts naturally 94 syllables.  
  
⌊Here ends the first *anuvāka*, with 9 hymns and 59 verses. The comm.  
(not SPP.) divides the Purusha-*sūkta* (our hymn 6) into two hymns, so  
that our vss. 1-5 make his hymn 6 and our vss. 6-16 make his hymn 7:  
thus his first *anuvāka* consists of 10 hymns.—There are of course no  
further quotations from the Old Anukr. or *Pañcapaṭalikā:* cf. p. 896,  
line 4.⌋
</details>

<details><summary>Griffith</summary>

Earth alleviation, air alleviation, heaven alleviation, waters alleviation, plants alleviation, trees alleviation, all Gods my al- leviation, collective Gods my alleviation, alleviation by allevia- tions. By these alleviations, these universal alleviations, I allay all that is terrific here, all that is cruel, all that is wicked. This hath been calmed, this is now auspicious. Let all be favourable to us.
</details>
