+++
title = "०४ नेव मांसे"

+++

<details><summary>Whitney</summary>

### Translation
4. Not as it were stuck (*ā́hata*) in the flesh, not in the fat, not as  
it were in the marrows, let the spotted slimy (?) afterbirth come down,  
for the dog to eat; let the afterbirth descend.

### Notes
SPP. reads in **a** *pī́vasi*, with the comm. and a small minority of his  
mss.; three of ours (H. O. Op.) have *píbasi*. Ppp. has a very different  
text (preserved in the *nāgarī* copy, though lost in the original text):  
*nāi 'va snāvasu na parvasu na ketheṣu* (*keśeṣu*) *na nakheṣu ca;* then  
our **c, d**, without variant; then *nāi 'va pause* (*māṅse?*) *na  
pīvasi nāi 'va kastyoś vanā yutam;* then our **e**; and with this ends  
the hymn as given in book i. The comm. reads in **a** *māṅséna* for  
*māṅsé ná*, and resorts to various devices to get rid of the difficulty  
thus caused; two of our mss. (O. Op.), and one or two of SPP's, give the  
same. Some of our mss. are very awkward about combining *jarā́yu* and  
*áttave*, in part omitting the *v*, or (I.) reading *-yū́tt-*. PGS. (i.  
16. 2) has the verse, but in different order: first our **c, d**,  
without variant; then our **a, b**, in the form *nāi 'va māṅsena pīvari  
na kasmiṅś canā "yatam;* then our **e**. But for its support of  
*śévalam*, we might be tempted to emend to *kévalam;* the comm. has the  
worthless explanation *jalasyo 'paristhitaśāivālavat  
āntarāvayavāsambaddham*. Further may be compared HGS. ii. 3. 1. ⌊MP., at  
ii. 11. 19, 20, has the verse with variants.⌋
</details>

<details><summary>Griffith</summary>

Descendat viscosa placenta, cani, comedenda placenta; decidat placenta.
</details>
