+++
title = "०५ अप स्तेनम्"

+++

<details><summary>Whitney</summary>

### Translation
5. Thou didst make the thief stay away, and the kine-driving robber,  
also him who, haltering the courser's head, tries to lead it \[away\].

### Notes
The *pada*-mss. strangely read at the beginning *apáḥ;* the rest ⌊save  
one of SPP's, p.m., which has *ápa*⌋ accent *apá;* SPP., as well as our  
text, emends to *ápa*, which the comm. also understands. All the mss.  
have *vā́sas*, and the comm., and SPP.; our *avāsayas* is a bold  
emendation, but makes both good meter and good sense. Ppp. gives no  
help: *apa stedaṁ vāsamathaṁ*. In **b**, SPP. follows the comm. in  
reading *goajám;* most of the mss. give *gór ájam*, but a part *górájas*  
(p. *górájaḥ!* but one ms. *gó ‘jaḥ* ⌊or *gó॰jaḥ:* that is *gó* and  
*jaḥ* with *avagraha*-sign between⌋, corrected to *góájaḥ*). ⌊Ppp. reads  
*gotham*. The comm. absurdly takes *goajám* as a copulative compound, =  
*gā ajāṅś ca*, and makes it and *vā́sas* objects of *nínīṣati*. The  
translation implies rather SPP's text than ours ⌊that is *goajám* rather  
than *gór ájam*, I suppose⌋. ⌊At the end, the *níneṣati* of the Berlin  
text is doubtless to be corrected to *nínīṣati* (cf. the stems in W's  
*Roots*, *Verb-forms*, etc., p. 233-4): *nínīṣati* is read by Ppp., by  
W's O.D.I., and (since he reports nothing to the contrary) by all of  
SPP's authorities. From the *Index Verborum* and from the *Roots* (p.  
91) it would appear that W's later judgment rejected the *níneṣati* of  
the text and some mss., though he has overlooked the matter here. The  
desiderative⌋ so distinctly calls for a prefix that one is tempted  
further to emend *átho* in **c** to *ápa*.
</details>

<details><summary>Griffith</summary>

The thief hast thou kept far away, the robber driver of our kine. Even him who having covered up the horse's head would lead him off.
</details>
