+++
title = "०४ इयमेव सा"

+++

<details><summary>Whitney</summary>

### Translation
4. This same is she that first shone out; among these other ones (f.)  
she goes about (*car*), having entered; great greatnesses \[are\] within  
her; the bride (*vadhū́*), the new-going generatrix, hath conquered.

### Notes
This verse is repeated below as viii. 9. 11. It occurs, with  
considerable variants, in a whole series of other texts: TS. (iv. 3.  
11¹), MS. (ii. 13. 10), K. (xxxix. 10), śGS. (iii. 12. 3), and MB. (ii.  
2. 15). For *āsv ítarāsu*, TS. and śGS. have *antár asyā́m;* MS., also  
Ppp., *sā́ ’psv àntás;* MB., *se ’yam apsv antas.* All of them, with  
Ppp., invert the order of **c** and **d**; and they have a different  
version of our **c**: *tráya* (but Ppp. *trita*) *enām mahimā́naḥ  
sacante* (śGS. *-ntām*), but MB. *viśve hy asyām mahimāno antaḥ;* while,  
for *jigāya* in **d**, TS. and śGS. give *jajāna*, and MS. and Ppp.  
*mimāya*, śGS. following it with *navakṛj;* and MB. reads *prathamā* for  
our *navagát*. śGS., moreover, has in **a** *vyuchat.* These variants  
speak ill for the tradition. The comm. gives four diverse explanations  
of *navagát:* going in company with each new or daily rising sun;  
pervading the new originating kind of living creatures; going to a daily  
originating new form; or, finally, going to the nine-fold divisions of  
the day; and the comment to TS. ⌊reported by Weber⌋ adds a fifth, "newly  
married"; if the last is the meaning, *jajāna* is better with it than  
*jigāya:* "as soon as wedded to the new year, she bears the days that  
follow." The meter is really redundant by a syllable in **a**  
⌊*iyāívá?*⌋. ⌊Further, MB. has in **a** *eṣāi ’va sā yā pūrvā vy-;* and  
Ppp. ends **d** with *janitrīm.*—BR., v. 1538, give 'erst-gebärend' for  
*navagát.*
</details>

<details><summary>Griffith</summary>

This same is she whose light first dawned upon us: she moves established in the midst of others: Great powers and glories are contained within her: a first-born bride, she conquers and bears children.
</details>
