+++
title = "०७ आ मा"

+++

<details><summary>Whitney</summary>

### Translation
7. \[Set\] thou me in both prosperity and abundance; O night, may we be  
in the favor of the gods.

### Notes
O spoon, fly away full; fly back hither well-filled; jointly enjoying  
all sacrifices, bring to us food (*íṣ*), refreshment (*ū́rj*).  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
The first two pādas, which seem to have nothing to do with the rest of  
the verse, are wanting in Ppp. What follows them is a complete  
*anuṣṭubh*, and quoted by its pratīka in Vāit. (see above); its first  
half is found in several other texts: VS. (iii. 49), TS. (i. 8. 4¹), MS.  
(i. 10. 2), K. (ix. 5), AśS. (ii. 18. 13); of these, VS. TS. AśS. read  
*darvi* for *darve*, as does also the comm., with a few of SPP's mss.  
Ppp. has *saṁpṛñcatī iṣam* in the last half-verse. The comm. understands  
*ā sthāpaya* in **a**, as in the translation; *bhaja* would answer an  
equally good purpose. He explains that the spoon is to go forth with  
oblation and to return with the answering blessings. *Sambhuñjatī* he  
renders by *haviṣā samyak pālayantī prīņayantī.* Finally, he points out  
that, as **c** is quoted as a *pratīka*, **a** and **b** have a right to  
the character of a separate verse; but that in the *pañcapaṭalikā* the  
whole is made a verse, with three *avasānas;* the statement, but not the  
title, appears to fit our Anukr.; this scans as 8 + 10; 8 + 8: 8 + 8 =  
50, needlessly counting only 10 syllables in **b**. In our ed., read  
*mā* for *me*. ⌊Cf. iv. 15. 12 n.⌋
</details>

<details><summary>Griffith</summary>

Come thou to nourish me and make me prosper. Night! may the favour of the Gods attend us. Filled full, O Ladle, fly thou forth. Completely filled fly back again. Serving at every sacrifice bring to us food and energy.
</details>
